["agac_task3_0", ["Effects of a leukemia-associated gain-of-function mutation of SHP-2 phosphatase on interleukin-3 signaling.\nMutations in SHP-2 phosphatase that cause hyperactivation of its catalytic activity have been identified in human leukemias, particularly juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia, which is characterized by hypersensitivity of myeloid progenitor cells to granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor and interleukin (IL)-3. However, the molecular mechanisms by which gain-of-function (GOF) mutations of SHP-2 induce hematopoietic malignancies are not fully understood. Our previous studies have shown that SHP-2 plays an essential role in IL-3 signal transduction in both catalytic-dependent and -independent manners and that overexpression (5-6-fold) of wild type (WT) SHP-2 attenuates IL-3-mediated hematopoietic cell function through accelerated dephosphorylation of STAT5. These results raised the possibility that SHP-2-associated leukemias are not solely attributed to the increased catalytic activity of GOF mutant SHP-2. GOF mutant SHP-2 must have gained additional capacities. To test this possibility, we investigated effects of a GOF mutation of SHP-2 (SHP-2 E76K) on hematopoietic cell function and IL-3 signal transduction by comparing with those of overexpressed WT SHP-2. Our results showed that SHP-2 E76K mutation caused myeloproliferative disease in mice, while overexpression of WT SHP-2 decreased hematopoietic potential of the transduced cells in recipient animals. The E76K mutation in the N-terminal Src homology 2 domain increased interactions of mutant SHP-2 with Grb2, Gab2, and p85, leading to hyperactivation of IL-3-induced Erk and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathways. In addition, despite the substantial increase in the catalytic activity, dephosphorylation of STAT5 by SHP-2 E76K was dampened. Furthermore, catalytically inactive SHP-2 E76K with an additional C459S mutation retained the capability to increase the interaction with Gab2 and to enhance the activation of the PI3K pathway. Taken together, these studies suggest that in addition to the elevated catalytic activity, fundamental changes in physical and functional interactions between GOF mutant SHP-2 and signaling partners also play an important role in SHP-2-related leukemigenesis.", "Effects of a leukemia-associated gain-of-function mutation of SHP-2 phosphatase on interleukin-3 signaling.\nMutations in SHP-2 phosphatase that cause hyperactivation of its catalytic activity have been identified in human leukemias, particularly juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia, which is characterized by hypersensitivity of myeloid progenitor cells to granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor and interleukin (IL)-3. However, the molecular mechanisms by which gain-of-function (GOF) mutations of SHP-2 induce hematopoietic malignancies are not fully understood. Our previous studies have shown that SHP-2 plays an essential role in IL-3 signal transduction in both catalytic-dependent and -independent manners and that overexpression (5-6-fold) of wild type (WT) SHP-2 attenuates IL-3-mediated hematopoietic cell function through accelerated dephosphorylation of STAT5. These results raised the possibility that SHP-2-associated leukemias are not solely attributed to the increased catalytic activity of GOF mutant SHP-2. GOF mutant SHP-2 must have gained additional capacities. To test this possibility, we investigated effects of a GOF mutation of SHP-2 (SHP-2 E76K) on hematopoietic cell function and IL-3 signal transduction by comparing with those of overexpressed WT SHP-2. Our results showed that SHP-2 E76K mutation caused myeloproliferative disease in mice, while overexpression of WT SHP-2 decreased hematopoietic potential of the transduced cells in recipient animals. The E76K mutation in the N-terminal Src homology 2 domain increased interactions of mutant SHP-2 with Grb2, Gab2, and p85, leading to hyperactivation of IL-3-induced Erk and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathways. In addition, despite the substantial increase in the catalytic activity, dephosphorylation of STAT5 by SHP-2 E76K was dampened. Furthermore, catalytically inactive SHP-2 E76K with an additional C459S mutation retained the capability to increase the interaction with Gab2 and to enhance the activation of the PI3K pathway. Taken together, these studies suggest that in addition to the elevated catalytic activity, fundamental changes in physical and functional interactions between GOF mutant SHP-2 and signaling partners also play an important role in SHP-2-related leukemigenesis."]]
["agac_task3_1", ["Identification and functional analysis of novel variants of the human melanocortin 1 receptor found in melanoma patients.\nThe melanocortin 1 receptor, a Gs protein-coupled receptor expressed in epidermal melanocytes, is a major determinant of skin pigmentation and phototype and an important contributor to melanoma risk. MC1R activation stimulates synthesis of black, strongly photoprotective eumelanin pigments. Several MC1R alleles are associated with red hair, fair skin, increased sensitivity to ultraviolet radiation, and increased skin cancer risk. The MC1R gene is highly polymorphic, but only a few naturally occurring alleles have been functionally characterized, which complicates the establishment of accurate correlations between the signaling properties of mutant alleles and defined cutaneous phenotypes. We report the functional characterization of six MC1R alleles found in Spanish melanoma patients. Two variants (c.152T>C, p.Val51Ala and c.865T>C, p.Cys289Arg) have never been described, and the others (c.112G>A, p.Val38Met; c.122C>T, p.Ser41Phe; c.383T>C, p.Met128Thr; and c.842A>G, p.Asn281Ser) have not been analyzed for function. p.Asn281Ser corresponds to a functionally silent polymorphism. The other mutations are associated with varying degrees of loss of function (LOF), from moderate decreases in coupling to the cAMP pathway (p.Val38Met and p.Val51Ala) to nearly complete absence of functional coupling (p.Ser41Phe, p.Met128Thr, and p.Cys289Arg). The LOF p.Met128Thr and p.Cys289Arg mutants are trafficked to the cell surface, but are unable to bind agonists efficiently. Conversely, LOF of p.Val38Met, p.Ser41Phe, and p.Val51Ala is due to reduced cell surface expression as a consequence of retention in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Therefore, LOF of MC1R alleles is frequently associated with aberrant forward trafficking and accumulation within the ER or with inability to bind properly the activatory ligand."]]
["agac_task3_2", ["Elevated expression of p53 gain-of-function mutation R175H in endometrial cancer cells can increase the invasive phenotypes by activation of the EGFR/PI3K/AKT pathway.\nBACKGROUND: p53 is the most commonly mutated tumor suppressor gene in human cancers. In addition to the loss of tumor suppression function and exertion of dominant-negative effects over the remaining wild-type protein, several p53 mutants can gain novel oncogenic functions (gain-of-function, GOF) that actively regulate cancer development and progression. In human endometrial cancer, p53 mutation is more often associated with aggressive nonendometrioid cancer. However, it was unknown if p53 mutants contributed to endometrial cancer progression through the GOF properties.\nMETHODS: To clarify the relationship between expression of p53 GOF mutation (p53-R175H) and invasive potential of human endometrial cancer KLE cells, we tested the consequences of up-regulation and down-regulation of p53-R175H in KLE cells by inducing p53-R175H expression vector or suppressing the p53 gene with short hairpin RNA.\nRESULTS: We found that forced over-expression of p53-R175H significantly promoted cell migration and invasion, and induced activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)/phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT pathway. Conversely, suppression of p53-R175H with short hairpin RNA significantly inhibited cell migration and invasion, and resulted in attenuation of EGFR/PI3K/AKT pathway.\nCONCLUSION: These findings show for the first time that elevated expression of p53-R175H mutant may exert gain-of-function activity to activate the EGFR/PI3K/AKT pathway and thus may contribute to the invasive phenotype in endometrial cancer.", "Gain-of-function mutant p53 upregulates CXC chemokines and enhances cell migration.\nThe role of dominant transforming p53 in carcinogenesis is poorly understood. Our previous data suggested that aberrant p53 proteins can enhance tumorigenesis and metastasis. Here, we examined potential mechanisms through which gain-of-function (GOF) p53 proteins can induce motility. Cells expressing GOF p53 -R175H, -R273H and -D281G showed enhanced migration, which was reversed by RNA interference (RNAi) or transactivation-deficient mutants. In cells with engineered or endogenous p53 mutants, enhanced migration was reduced by downregulation of nuclear factor-kappaB2, a GOF p53 target. We found that GOF p53 proteins upregulate CXC-chemokine expression, the inflammatory mediators that contribute to multiple aspects of tumorigenesis. Elevated expression of CXCL5, CXCL8 and CXCL12 was found in cells expressing oncogenic p53. Transcription was elevated as CXCL5 and CXCL8 promoter activity was higher in cells expressing GOF p53, whereas wild-type p53 repressed promoter activity. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed enhanced presence of acetylated histone H3 on the CXCL5 promoter in H1299/R273H cells, in agreement with increased transcriptional activity of the promoter, whereas RNAi-mediated repression of CXCL5 inhibited cell migration. Consistent with this, knockdown of the endogenous mutant p53 in lung cancer or melanoma cells reduced CXCL5 expression and cell migration. Furthermore, short hairpin RNA knockdown of mutant p53 in MDA-MB-231 cells reduced expression of a number of key targets, including several chemokines and other inflammatory mediators. Finally, CXCL5 expression was also elevated in lung tumor samples containing GOF p53, indicating relevance to human cancer. The data suggest a mechanistic link between GOF p53 proteins and chemokines in enhanced cell motility.", "Allele specific gain-of-function activity of p53 mutants in lung cancer cells.\np53 mutations are mostly single amino acid changes resulting in expression of a stable mutant protein with \"gain of function\" (GOF) activity having a dominant oncogenic role rather than simple loss of function of wild-type p53. Knock-down of mutant p53 in human lung cancer cell lines with different endogenous p53 mutants results in loss of GOF activity as shown by lowering of cell growth rate. Two lung cancer cell lines, ABC1 and H1437, carrying endogenous mutants p53-P278S and -R267P, show reduction in growth rate on knock-down on p53 levels. However, whereas reduction of the p53 level induces loss of tumorigenicity in nude mice for ABC1 cells, it escalates tumorigenicity for H1437 cells. We have tested their transactivation potential on p53 target gene promoters by performing transient transcriptional assays in the p53-null H1299 lung cancer cell line. Interestingly, while the mutant p53 target promoter Axl was activated by both the mutants, the p21 promoter was activated by p53-R267P and wild-type p53 but not by p53-P278S; showing a clear difference in transcriptional activity between the two mutants. Our results demonstrate allele specificity between GOF p53 mutants and attempt to show that the specificity is dependent on the transactivation property of GOF p53; it also suggests importance of p21 activation in tumor suppression by p53.", "Mutant p53 prolongs NF-\u03baB activation and promotes chronic inflammation and inflammation-associated colorectal cancer.\nThe tumor suppressor p53 is frequently mutated in human cancer. Common mutant p53 (mutp53) isoforms can actively promote cancer through gain-of-function (GOF) mechanisms. We report that mutp53 prolongs TNF-\u03b1-induced NF-\u03baB activation in cultured cells and intestinal organoid cultures. Remarkably, when exposed to dextran sulfate sodium, mice harboring a germline p53 mutation develop severe chronic inflammation and persistent tissue damage, and are highly prone to inflammation-associated colon cancer. This mutp53 GOF is manifested by rapid onset of flat dysplastic lesions that progress to invasive carcinoma with mutp53 accumulation and augmented NF-\u03baB activation, faithfully recapitulating features frequently observed in human colitis-associated colorectal cancer (CAC). These findings might explain the early appearance of p53 mutations in human CAC.", "Clinical relevance of gain-of-function mutations of p53 in high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma.\nPURPOSE: Inactivation of TP53, which occurs predominantly by missense mutations in exons 4-9, is a major genetic alteration in a subset of human cancer. In spite of growing evidence that gain-of-function (GOF) mutations of p53 also have oncogenic activity, little is known about the clinical relevance of these mutations.\nMETHODS: The clinicopathological features of high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGS-OvCa) patients with GOF p53 mutations were evaluated according to a comprehensive somatic mutation profile comprised of whole exome sequencing, mRNA expression, and protein expression profiles obtained from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA).\nRESULTS: Patients with a mutant p53 protein (mutp53) with a GOF mutation showed higher p53 mRNA and protein expression levels than patients with p53 mutation with no evidence of GOF (NE-GOF). GOF mutations were more likely to occur within mutational hotspots, and at CpG sites, and resulted in mutp53 with higher functional severity (FS) scores. Clinically, patients with GOF mutations showed a higher frequency of platinum resistance (22/58, 37.9%) than patients with NE-GOF mutations (12/56, 21.4%) (p=0.054). Furthermore, patients with GOF mutations were more likely to develop distant metastasis (36/55, 65.5%) than local recurrence (19/55, 34.5%), whereas patients with NE-GOF mutations showed a higher frequency of locoregional recurrence (26/47, 55.3%) than distant metastasis (21/47, 44.7%) (p=0.035). There were no differences in overall or progression-free survival between patients with GOF or NE-GOF mutp53.\nCONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that patient with GOF mutp53 is characterized by a greater likelihood of platinum treatment resistance and distant metastatic properties in HGS-OvCa.", "Mutant p53 gain of function can be at the root of dedifferentiation of human osteosarcoma MG63 cells into 3AB-OS cancer stem cells.\nOsteosarcoma is a highly metastatic tumor affecting adolescents, for which there is no second-line chemotherapy. As suggested for most tumors, its capability to overgrow is probably driven by cancer stem cells (CSCs), and finding new targets to kill CSCs may be critical for improving patient survival. TP53 is the most frequently mutated tumor suppressor gene in cancers and mutant p53 protein (mutp53) can acquire gain of function (GOF) strongly contributing to malignancy. Studies thus far have not shown p53-GOF in osteosarcoma. Here, we investigated TP53 gene status/role in 3AB-OS cells-a highly aggressive CSC line previously selected from human osteosarcoma MG63 cells-to evaluate its involvement in promoting proliferation, invasiveness, resistance to apoptosis and stemness. By RT-PCR, methylation-specific PCR, fluorescent in situ hybridization, DNA sequence, western blot and immunofluorescence analyses, we have shown that-in comparison with parental MG63 cells where TP53 gene is hypermethylated, rearranged and in single copy-in 3AB-OS cells, TP53 is unmethylated, rearranged and in multiple copies, and mutp53 (p53-R248W/P72R) is post-translationally modified and with nuclear localization. p53-R248W/P72R-knockdown by short-interfering RNA reduced the growth and replication rate of 3AB-OS cells, markedly increasing cell cycle inhibitor levels and sensitized 3AB-OS cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis by DR5 up-regulation; moreover, it strongly decreased the levels of stemness and invasiveness genes. We have also found that the ectopic expression of p53-R248W/P72R in MG63 cells promoted cancer stem-like features, as high proliferation rate, sphere formation, clonogenic growth, high migration and invasive ability; furthermore, it strongly increased the levels of stemness proteins. Overall, the findings suggest the involvement of p53-R248W/P72R at the origin of the aberrant characters of the 3AB-OS cells with the hypothesis that its GOF can be at the root of the dedifferentiation of MG63 cells into CSCs."]]
["agac_task3_3", ["The tyrosine phosphatase Shp2 in development and cancer.\nDeregulation of signaling pathways, through mutation or other molecular changes, can ultimately result in disease. The tyrosine phosphatase Shp2 has emerged as a major regulator of receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) and cytokine receptor signaling. In the last decade, germline mutations in the human PTPN11 gene, encoding Shp2, were linked to Noonan (NS) and LEOPARD syndromes, two multisymptomatic developmental disorders that are characterized by short stature, craniofacial defects, cardiac defects, and mental retardation. Somatic Shp2 mutations are also associated with several types of human malignancies, such as the most common juvenile leukemia, juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML). Whereas NS and JMML are caused by gain-of-function (GOF) mutations of Shp2, loss-of-function (LOF) mutations are thought to be associated with LEOPARD syndrome. Animal models that carry conditional LOF and GOF mutations have allowed a better understanding of the mechanism of Shp2 function in disease, and shed light on the role of Shp2 in signaling pathways that control decisive events during embryonic development or during cellular transformation/tumorigenesis."]]
["agac_task3_4", ["The tyrosine phosphatase Shp2 in development and cancer.\nDeregulation of signaling pathways, through mutation or other molecular changes, can ultimately result in disease. The tyrosine phosphatase Shp2 has emerged as a major regulator of receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) and cytokine receptor signaling. In the last decade, germline mutations in the human PTPN11 gene, encoding Shp2, were linked to Noonan (NS) and LEOPARD syndromes, two multisymptomatic developmental disorders that are characterized by short stature, craniofacial defects, cardiac defects, and mental retardation. Somatic Shp2 mutations are also associated with several types of human malignancies, such as the most common juvenile leukemia, juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML). Whereas NS and JMML are caused by gain-of-function (GOF) mutations of Shp2, loss-of-function (LOF) mutations are thought to be associated with LEOPARD syndrome. Animal models that carry conditional LOF and GOF mutations have allowed a better understanding of the mechanism of Shp2 function in disease, and shed light on the role of Shp2 in signaling pathways that control decisive events during embryonic development or during cellular transformation/tumorigenesis."]]
["agac_task3_5", ["Disruption of the temporally regulated cloaca endodermal \u03b2-catenin signaling causes anorectal malformations.\nThe cloaca is temporally formed and eventually divided by the urorectal septum (URS) during urogenital and anorectal organ development. Although congenital malformations, such as anorectal malformations (ARMs), are frequently observed during this process, the underlying pathogenic mechanisms remain unclear. \u03b2-Catenin is a critical component of canonical Wnt signaling and is essential for the regulation of cell differentiation and morphogenesis during embryogenesis. The expression of \u03b2-catenin is observed in endodermal epithelia, including URS epithelia. We modulated the \u03b2-catenin gene conditionally in endodermal epithelia by utilizing tamoxifen-inducible Cre driver line (Shh(CreERT2)). Both \u03b2-catenin loss- and gain-of-function (LOF and GOF) mutants displayed abnormal clefts in the perineal region and hypoplastic elongation of the URS. The mutants also displayed reduced cell proliferation in the URS mesenchyme. In addition, the \u03b2-catenin GOF mutants displayed reduced apoptosis and subsequently increased apoptosis in the URS epithelium. This instability possibly resulted in reduced expression levels of differentiation markers, such as keratin 1 and filaggrin, in the perineal epithelia. The expression of bone morphogenetic protein (Bmp) genes, such as Bmp4 and Bmp7, was also ectopically induced in the epithelia of the URS in the \u03b2-catenin GOF mutants. The expression of the Msx2 gene and phosphorylated-Smad1/5/8, possible readouts of Bmp signaling, was also increased in the mutants. Moreover, we introduced an additional mutation for a Bmp receptor gene: BmprIA. The Shh(CreERT2/+); \u03b2-catenin(flox(ex3)/+); BmprIA(flox/-) mutants displayed partial restoration of URS elongation compared with the \u03b2-catenin GOF mutants. These results indicate that some ARM phenotypes in the \u03b2-catenin GOF mutants were caused by abnormal Bmp signaling. The current analysis revealed the close relation of endodermal \u03b2-catenin signaling to the ARM phenotypes. These results are considered to shed light on the pathogenic mechanisms of human ARMs."]]
["agac_task3_6", ["Assessing the functional consequence of loss of function variants using electronic medical record and large-scale genomics consortium efforts.\nEstimates from large scale genome sequencing studies indicate that each human carries up to 20 genetic variants that are predicted to results in loss of function (LOF) of protein-coding genes. While some are known disease-causing variants or common, tolerated, LOFs in non-essential genes, the majority remain of unknown consequence. We explore the possibility of using imputed GWAS data from large biorepositories such as the electronic medical record and genomics (eMERGE) consortium to determine the effects of rare LOFs. Here, we show that two hypocholesterolemia-associated LOF mutations in the PCSK9 gene can be accurately imputed into large-scale GWAS datasets which raises the possibility of assessing LOFs through genomics-linked medical records.", "Urine-sample-derived human induced pluripotent stem cells as a model to study PCSK9-mediated autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia.\nProprotein convertase subtilisin kexin type 9 (PCSK9) is a critical modulator of cholesterol homeostasis. Whereas PCSK9 gain-of-function (GOF) mutations are associated with autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia (ADH) and premature atherosclerosis, PCSK9 loss-of-function (LOF) mutations have a cardio-protective effect and in some cases can lead to familial hypobetalipoproteinemia (FHBL). However, limitations of the currently available cellular models preclude deciphering the consequences of PCSK9 mutation further. We aimed to validate urine-sample-derived human induced pluripotent stem cells (UhiPSCs) as an appropriate tool to model PCSK9-mediated ADH and FHBL. To achieve our goal, urine-sample-derived somatic cells were reprogrammed into hiPSCs by using episomal vectors. UhiPSC were efficiently differentiated into hepatocyte-like cells (HLCs). Compared to control cells, cells originally derived from an individual with ADH (HLC-S127R) secreted less PCSK9 in the media (-38.5%; P=0.038) and had a 71% decrease (P<0.001) of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) uptake, whereas cells originally derived from an individual with FHBL (HLC-R104C/V114A) displayed a strong decrease in PCSK9 secretion (-89.7%; P<0.001) and had a 106% increase (P=0.0104) of LDL uptake. Pravastatin treatment significantly enhanced LDL receptor (LDLR) and PCSK9 mRNA gene expression, as well as PCSK9 secretion and LDL uptake in both control and S127R HLCs. Pravastatin treatment of multiple clones led to an average increase of LDL uptake of 2.19\u00b10.77-fold in HLC-S127R compared to 1.38\u00b10.49 fold in control HLCs (P<0.01), in line with the good response to statin treatment of individuals carrying the S127R mutation (mean LDL cholesterol reduction=60.4%, n=5). In conclusion, urine samples provide an attractive and convenient source of somatic cells for reprogramming and hepatocyte differentiation, but also a powerful tool to further decipher PCSK9 mutations and function.", "Complexity of mechanisms among human proprotein convertase subtilisin-kexin type 9 variants.\nPURPOSE OF REVIEW: There are many reports of human variants in proprotein convertase subtilisin-kexin type 9 (PCSK9) that are either gain-of-function (GOF) or loss-of-function (LOF), with downstream effects on LDL cholesterol and cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk. However, data on particular mechanisms have only been minimally curated.\nRECENT FINDINGS: GOF variants are individually ultrarare, affect all domains of the protein, act to reduce LDL receptor expression through several mechanisms, are a minor cause of familial hypercholesterolemia, have been reported mainly within families, have variable LDL cholesterol-raising effects, and are associated with increased CVD risk mainly through observational studies in families and small cohorts. In contrast, LOF variants can be either ultrarare mutations or relatively more common polymorphisms seen in populations, affect all domains of the protein, act to increase LDL receptor expression through several mechanisms, have variable LDL cholesterol-lowering effects, and have been associated with decreased CVD risk mainly through Mendelian randomization studies in epidemiologic populations.\nSUMMARY: There is considerable complexity underlying the clinical concept of both LOF and GOF variants of PCSK9. But despite the underlying mechanistic heterogeneity, altered PCSK9 secretion or function is ultimately correlated with plasma LDL cholesterol level, which is also the driver of CVD outcomes.", "Loss-of-function PCSK9 mutants evade the unfolded protein response sensor GRP78 and fail to induce endoplasmic reticulum stress when retained.\nThe proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type-9 (PCSK9) plays a central role in cardiovascular disease (CVD) by degrading hepatic low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR). As such, loss-of-function (LOF) PCSK9 variants that fail to exit the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) increase hepatic LDLR levels and lower the risk of developing CVD. The retention of misfolded protein in the ER can cause ER stress and activate the unfolded protein response (UPR). In this study, we investigated whether a variety of LOF PCSK9 variants that are retained in the ER can cause ER stress and hepatic cytotoxicity. Although overexpression of these PCSK9 variants caused an accumulation in the ER of hepatocytes, UPR activation or apoptosis was not observed. Furthermore, ER retention of endogenous PCSK9 via splice switching also failed to induce the UPR. Consistent with these in vitro studies, overexpression of PCSK9 in the livers of mice had no impact on UPR activation. To elucidate the cellular mechanism to explain these surprising findings, we observed that the 94-kDa glucose-regulated protein (GRP94) sequesters PCSK9 away from the 78-kDa glucose-regulated protein (GRP78), the major activator of the UPR. As a result, GRP94 knockdown increased the stability of GRP78-PCSK9 complex and resulted in UPR activation following overexpression of ER-retained PCSK9 variants relative to WT secreted controls. Given that overexpression of these LOF PCSK9 variants does not cause UPR activation under normal homeostatic conditions, therapeutic strategies aimed at blocking the autocatalytic cleavage of PCSK9 in the ER represent a viable strategy for reducing circulating PCSK9.", "A case of hypocholesterolemia and steatosis in a carrier of a PCSK9 loss-of-function mutation and polymorphisms predisposing to nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.\nWe report a new case of hypobetalipoproteinemia in a 44-year-old man of Peruvian origin exhibiting a heterozygous PCSK9 missense mutation (c.946\u00a0G>T, p. Gly316Cys). In\u00a0vitro functional studies demonstrated that this mutation leads to a loss of function of PCSK9 on low-density lipoprotein receptor degradation. This patient exhibited liver steatosis; he was neither diabetic, nor obese or alcoholic, but is a carrier of 2 polymorphisms, p.Ile148Met (rs738409) and p.Glu167Lys (rs58542926) on PNPLA3 and TM6SF2 gene, respectively, previously shown to be associated with nonalcoholic steatosis and fibrosis evolution. These data suggested that if a resistance to hepatic steatosis mediated by the PCSK9 deficiency exists, as demonstrated in mice, it is not sufficient to prevent hepatic fatty accumulation in the case of genetic factors predisposing to nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.", "A case of hypocholesterolemia and steatosis in a carrier of a PCSK9 loss-of-function mutation and polymorphisms predisposing to nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.\nWe report a new case of hypobetalipoproteinemia in a 44-year-old man of Peruvian origin exhibiting a heterozygous PCSK9 missense mutation (c.946\u00a0G>T, p. Gly316Cys). In\u00a0vitro functional studies demonstrated that this mutation leads to a loss of function of PCSK9 on low-density lipoprotein receptor degradation. This patient exhibited liver steatosis; he was neither diabetic, nor obese or alcoholic, but is a carrier of 2 polymorphisms, p.Ile148Met (rs738409) and p.Glu167Lys (rs58542926) on PNPLA3 and TM6SF2 gene, respectively, previously shown to be associated with nonalcoholic steatosis and fibrosis evolution. These data suggested that if a resistance to hepatic steatosis mediated by the PCSK9 deficiency exists, as demonstrated in mice, it is not sufficient to prevent hepatic fatty accumulation in the case of genetic factors predisposing to nonalcoholic fatty liver disease."]]
["agac_task3_7", ["PDGF, pericytes and the pathogenesis of idiopathic basal ganglia calcification (IBGC).\nPlatelet-derived growth factors (PDGFs) are important mitogens for various types of mesenchymal cells, and as such, they exert critical functions during organogenesis in mammalian embryonic and early postnatal development. Increased or ectopic PDGF activity may also cause or contribute to diseases such as cancer and tissue fibrosis. Until recently, no loss-of-function (LOF) mutations in PDGF or PDGF receptor genes were reported as causally linked to a human disease. This changed in 2013 when reports appeared on presumed LOF mutations in the genes encoding PDGF-B and its receptor PDGF receptor-beta (PDGF-R\u03b2) in familial idiopathic basal ganglia calcification (IBGC), a brain disease characterized by anatomically localized calcifications in or near the blood microvessels. Here, we review PDGF-B and PDGF-R\u03b2 biology with special reference to their functions in brain-blood vessel development, pericyte recruitment and the regulation of the blood-brain barrier. We also discuss various scenarios for IBGC pathogenesis suggested by observations in patients and genetically engineered animal models of the disease."]]
["agac_task3_8", ["PDGF, pericytes and the pathogenesis of idiopathic basal ganglia calcification (IBGC).\nPlatelet-derived growth factors (PDGFs) are important mitogens for various types of mesenchymal cells, and as such, they exert critical functions during organogenesis in mammalian embryonic and early postnatal development. Increased or ectopic PDGF activity may also cause or contribute to diseases such as cancer and tissue fibrosis. Until recently, no loss-of-function (LOF) mutations in PDGF or PDGF receptor genes were reported as causally linked to a human disease. This changed in 2013 when reports appeared on presumed LOF mutations in the genes encoding PDGF-B and its receptor PDGF receptor-beta (PDGF-R\u03b2) in familial idiopathic basal ganglia calcification (IBGC), a brain disease characterized by anatomically localized calcifications in or near the blood microvessels. Here, we review PDGF-B and PDGF-R\u03b2 biology with special reference to their functions in brain-blood vessel development, pericyte recruitment and the regulation of the blood-brain barrier. We also discuss various scenarios for IBGC pathogenesis suggested by observations in patients and genetically engineered animal models of the disease."]]
["agac_task3_9", ["Rare variants in PPARG with decreased activity in adipocyte differentiation are associated with increased risk of type 2 diabetes.\nPeroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARG) is a master transcriptional regulator of adipocyte differentiation and a canonical target of antidiabetic thiazolidinedione medications. In rare families, loss-of-function (LOF) mutations in PPARG are known to cosegregate with lipodystrophy and insulin resistance; in the general population, the common P12A variant is associated with a decreased risk of type 2 diabetes (T2D). Whether and how rare variants in PPARG and defects in adipocyte differentiation influence risk of T2D in the general population remains undetermined. By sequencing PPARG in 19,752 T2D cases and controls drawn from multiple studies and ethnic groups, we identified 49 previously unidentified, nonsynonymous PPARG variants (MAF < 0.5%). Considered in aggregate (with or without computational prediction of functional consequence), these rare variants showed no association with T2D (OR = 1.35; P = 0.17). The function of the 49 variants was experimentally tested in a novel high-throughput human adipocyte differentiation assay, and nine were found to have reduced activity in the assay. Carrying any of these nine LOF variants was associated with a substantial increase in risk of T2D (OR = 7.22; P = 0.005). The combination of large-scale DNA sequencing and functional testing in the laboratory reveals that approximately 1 in 1,000 individuals carries a variant in PPARG that reduces function in a human adipocyte differentiation assay and is associated with a substantial risk of T2D."]]
["agac_task3_10", ["Loss-of-function de novo mutations play an important role in severe human neural tube defects.\nBACKGROUND: Neural tube defects (NTDs) are very common and severe birth defects that are caused by failure of neural tube closure and that have a complex aetiology. Anencephaly and spina bifida are severe NTDs that affect reproductive fitness and suggest a role for de novo mutations (DNMs) in their aetiology.\nMETHODS: We used whole-exome sequencing in 43 sporadic cases affected with myelomeningocele or anencephaly and their unaffected parents to identify DNMs in their exomes.\nRESULTS: We identified 42 coding DNMs in 25 cases, of which 6 were loss of function (LoF) showing a higher rate of LoF DNM in our cohort compared with control cohorts. Notably, we identified two protein-truncating DNMs in two independent cases in SHROOM3, previously associated with NTDs only in animal models. We have demonstrated a significant enrichment of LoF DNMs in this gene in NTDs compared with the gene specific DNM rate and to the DNM rate estimated from control cohorts. We also identified one nonsense DNM in PAX3 and two potentially causative missense DNMs in GRHL3 and PTPRS.\nCONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates an important role of LoF DNMs in the development of NTDs and strongly implicates SHROOM3 in its aetiology."]]
["agac_task3_11", ["Urine-sample-derived human induced pluripotent stem cells as a model to study PCSK9-mediated autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia.\nProprotein convertase subtilisin kexin type 9 (PCSK9) is a critical modulator of cholesterol homeostasis. Whereas PCSK9 gain-of-function (GOF) mutations are associated with autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia (ADH) and premature atherosclerosis, PCSK9 loss-of-function (LOF) mutations have a cardio-protective effect and in some cases can lead to familial hypobetalipoproteinemia (FHBL). However, limitations of the currently available cellular models preclude deciphering the consequences of PCSK9 mutation further. We aimed to validate urine-sample-derived human induced pluripotent stem cells (UhiPSCs) as an appropriate tool to model PCSK9-mediated ADH and FHBL. To achieve our goal, urine-sample-derived somatic cells were reprogrammed into hiPSCs by using episomal vectors. UhiPSC were efficiently differentiated into hepatocyte-like cells (HLCs). Compared to control cells, cells originally derived from an individual with ADH (HLC-S127R) secreted less PCSK9 in the media (-38.5%; P=0.038) and had a 71% decrease (P<0.001) of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) uptake, whereas cells originally derived from an individual with FHBL (HLC-R104C/V114A) displayed a strong decrease in PCSK9 secretion (-89.7%; P<0.001) and had a 106% increase (P=0.0104) of LDL uptake. Pravastatin treatment significantly enhanced LDL receptor (LDLR) and PCSK9 mRNA gene expression, as well as PCSK9 secretion and LDL uptake in both control and S127R HLCs. Pravastatin treatment of multiple clones led to an average increase of LDL uptake of 2.19\u00b10.77-fold in HLC-S127R compared to 1.38\u00b10.49 fold in control HLCs (P<0.01), in line with the good response to statin treatment of individuals carrying the S127R mutation (mean LDL cholesterol reduction=60.4%, n=5). In conclusion, urine samples provide an attractive and convenient source of somatic cells for reprogramming and hepatocyte differentiation, but also a powerful tool to further decipher PCSK9 mutations and function.", "Urine-sample-derived human induced pluripotent stem cells as a model to study PCSK9-mediated autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia.\nProprotein convertase subtilisin kexin type 9 (PCSK9) is a critical modulator of cholesterol homeostasis. Whereas PCSK9 gain-of-function (GOF) mutations are associated with autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia (ADH) and premature atherosclerosis, PCSK9 loss-of-function (LOF) mutations have a cardio-protective effect and in some cases can lead to familial hypobetalipoproteinemia (FHBL). However, limitations of the currently available cellular models preclude deciphering the consequences of PCSK9 mutation further. We aimed to validate urine-sample-derived human induced pluripotent stem cells (UhiPSCs) as an appropriate tool to model PCSK9-mediated ADH and FHBL. To achieve our goal, urine-sample-derived somatic cells were reprogrammed into hiPSCs by using episomal vectors. UhiPSC were efficiently differentiated into hepatocyte-like cells (HLCs). Compared to control cells, cells originally derived from an individual with ADH (HLC-S127R) secreted less PCSK9 in the media (-38.5%; P=0.038) and had a 71% decrease (P<0.001) of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) uptake, whereas cells originally derived from an individual with FHBL (HLC-R104C/V114A) displayed a strong decrease in PCSK9 secretion (-89.7%; P<0.001) and had a 106% increase (P=0.0104) of LDL uptake. Pravastatin treatment significantly enhanced LDL receptor (LDLR) and PCSK9 mRNA gene expression, as well as PCSK9 secretion and LDL uptake in both control and S127R HLCs. Pravastatin treatment of multiple clones led to an average increase of LDL uptake of 2.19\u00b10.77-fold in HLC-S127R compared to 1.38\u00b10.49 fold in control HLCs (P<0.01), in line with the good response to statin treatment of individuals carrying the S127R mutation (mean LDL cholesterol reduction=60.4%, n=5). In conclusion, urine samples provide an attractive and convenient source of somatic cells for reprogramming and hepatocyte differentiation, but also a powerful tool to further decipher PCSK9 mutations and function.", "Complexity of mechanisms among human proprotein convertase subtilisin-kexin type 9 variants.\nPURPOSE OF REVIEW: There are many reports of human variants in proprotein convertase subtilisin-kexin type 9 (PCSK9) that are either gain-of-function (GOF) or loss-of-function (LOF), with downstream effects on LDL cholesterol and cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk. However, data on particular mechanisms have only been minimally curated.\nRECENT FINDINGS: GOF variants are individually ultrarare, affect all domains of the protein, act to reduce LDL receptor expression through several mechanisms, are a minor cause of familial hypercholesterolemia, have been reported mainly within families, have variable LDL cholesterol-raising effects, and are associated with increased CVD risk mainly through observational studies in families and small cohorts. In contrast, LOF variants can be either ultrarare mutations or relatively more common polymorphisms seen in populations, affect all domains of the protein, act to increase LDL receptor expression through several mechanisms, have variable LDL cholesterol-lowering effects, and have been associated with decreased CVD risk mainly through Mendelian randomization studies in epidemiologic populations.\nSUMMARY: There is considerable complexity underlying the clinical concept of both LOF and GOF variants of PCSK9. But despite the underlying mechanistic heterogeneity, altered PCSK9 secretion or function is ultimately correlated with plasma LDL cholesterol level, which is also the driver of CVD outcomes."]]
["agac_task3_12", ["Recurrent MLK4 Loss-of-Function Mutations Suppress JNK Signaling to Promote Colon Tumorigenesis.\nMLK4 is a member of the mixed-lineage family of kinases that regulate the JNK, p38, and ERK kinase signaling pathways. MLK4 mutations have been identified in various human cancers, including frequently in colorectal cancer, where their function and pathobiological importance have been uncertain. In this study, we assessed the functional consequences of MLK4 mutations in colon tumorigenesis. Biochemical data indicated that a majority of MLK4 mutations are loss-of-function (LOF) mutations that can exert dominant-negative effects. In seeking to understand the abrogated activity of these mutants, we elucidated a new MLK4 catalytic domain structure. To determine whether MLK4 is required to maintain tumorigenic phenotypes, we reconstituted its signaling axis in colon cancer cells harboring MLK4-inactivating mutations. We found that restoring MLK4 activity reduced cell viability, proliferation, and colony formation in vitro and delayed tumor growth in vivo. Mechanistic investigations established that restoring the function of MLK4 selectively induced the JNK pathway and its downstream targets, cJUN, ATF3, and the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors CDKN1A and CDKN2B. Our work indicates that MLK4 is a novel tumor-suppressing kinase harboring frequent LOF mutations that lead to diminished signaling in the JNK pathway and enhanced proliferation in colon cancer. Cancer Res; 76(3); 1-12. \u00a92015 AACR."]]
["agac_task3_13", ["TBR1 regulates autism risk genes in the developing neocortex.\nExome sequencing studies have identified multiple genes harboring de novo loss-of-function (LoF) variants in individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASD), including TBR1, a master regulator of cortical development. We performed ChIP-seq for TBR1 during mouse cortical neurogenesis and show that TBR1-bound regions are enriched adjacent to ASD genes. ASD genes were also enriched among genes that are differentially expressed in Tbr1 knockouts, which together with the ChIP-seq data, suggests direct transcriptional regulation. Of the nine ASD genes examined, seven were misexpressed in the cortices of Tbr1 knockout mice, including six with increased expression in the deep cortical layers. ASD genes with adjacent cortical TBR1 ChIP-seq peaks also showed unusually low levels of LoF mutations in a reference human population and among Icelanders. We then leveraged TBR1 binding to identify an appealing subset of candidate ASD genes. Our findings highlight a TBR1-regulated network of ASD genes in the developing neocortex that are relatively intolerant to LoF mutations, indicating that these genes may play critical roles in normal cortical development."]]
["agac_task3_14", ["De Novo Mutations in SON Disrupt RNA Splicing of Genes Essential for Brain Development and Metabolism, Causing an Intellectual-Disability Syndrome.\nThe overall understanding of the molecular etiologies of intellectual disability (ID) and developmental delay (DD) is increasing as next-generation sequencing technologies identify genetic variants in individuals with such disorders. However, detailed analyses conclusively confirming these variants, as well as the underlying molecular mechanisms explaining the diseases, are often lacking. Here, we report on an ID syndrome caused by de novo heterozygous loss-of-function (LoF) mutations in SON. The syndrome is characterized by ID and/or DD, malformations of the cerebral cortex, epilepsy, vision problems, musculoskeletal abnormalities, and congenital malformations. Knockdown of son in zebrafish resulted in severe malformation of the spine, brain, and eyes. Importantly, analyses of RNA from affected individuals revealed that genes critical for neuronal migration and cortex organization (TUBG1, FLNA, PNKP, WDR62, PSMD3, and\u00a0HDAC6) and metabolism (PCK2, PFKL, IDH2, ACY1, and ADA) are significantly downregulated because of the accumulation of mis-spliced transcripts resulting from erroneous SON-mediated RNA splicing. Our data highlight SON as a master regulator governing neurodevelopment and demonstrate the importance of SON-mediated RNA splicing in human development."]]
["agac_task3_15", ["Atopic Dermatitis Susceptibility Variants in Filaggrin Hitchhike Hornerin Selective Sweep.\nHuman skin has evolved rapidly, leaving evolutionary signatures in the genome. The filaggrin (FLG) gene is widely studied for its skin-barrier function in humans. The extensive genetic variation in this gene, especially common loss-of-function (LoF) mutations, has been established as primary risk factors for atopic dermatitis. To investigate the evolution of this gene, we analyzed 2,504 human genomes and genotyped the copy number variation of filaggrin repeats within FLG in 126 individuals from diverse ancestral backgrounds. We were unable to replicate a recent study claiming that LoF of FLG is adaptive in northern latitudes with lower ultraviolet light exposure. Instead, we present multiple lines of evidence suggesting that FLG genetic variation, including LoF variants, have little or no effect on fitness in modern humans. Haplotype-level scrutinization of the locus revealed signatures of a recent selective sweep in Asia, which increased the allele frequency of a haplotype group (Huxian haplogroup) in Asian populations. Functionally, we found that the Huxian haplogroup carries dozens of functional variants in FLG and hornerin (HRNR) genes, including those that are associated with atopic dermatitis susceptibility, HRNR expression levels and microbiome diversity on the skin. Our results suggest that the target of the adaptive sweep is HRNR gene function, and the functional FLG variants that involve susceptibility to atopic dermatitis, seem to hitchhike the selective sweep on HRNR. Our study presents a novel case of a locus that harbors clinically relevant common genetic variation with complex evolutionary trajectories.", "[The formation of skin barrier and defective barrier-associated skin diseases].\n\u00a0\u00a0Since the discovery of loss-of-function mutations in filaggrin (FLG) gene in atopic dermatitis (AD) individuals, significant attention has been paid against the skin barrier as an initial starting point of atopic march. Although FLG is a significant cornification-associated gene, skin barrier formation is a complex process mediated by an array of genes with specific functions. In this article, the mechanism of physical skin barrier formation is reviewed in detail, focusing on specific gene functions and inherited disorders caused by genetic aberrations. Additionally, the mechanism of percutaneous sensitization with environmental allergens in association with FLG-deficiency is reviewed in order to clarify the link between defective skin barrier and atopic march. Finally, updated knowledge of psoriasis pathophysiology in connection with genetic defect in skin barrier is reviewed. This article would provide a novel opportunity to understand the allergic/autoimmune disorders from the viewpoint of non-classical immune cells.", "Loss-of-function mutations in filaggrin gene and malignant melanoma: a case control study.\nBACKGROUND: Loss-of-function mutations in filaggrin gene (FLG) have been suggested to increase the susceptibility of skin malignancies due to reduced levels of epidermal filaggrin and its degradation products, urocanic acid, which may be protective against ultraviolet irradiation.\nOBJECTIVE: We aimed to investigate the association between FLG mutation status and the occurrence of malignant melanoma (MM) in Danish adults.\nMETHODS: The prevalence of FLG mutations in a sample of MM biopsies was compared with a FLG genotyped cohort from two general population studies. Pearson's chi-square and Fisher's exact tests were used to compare the two groups.\nRESULTS: A total of 867 MM biopsies and 9965 general population controls were genotyped, respectively. In the MM sample 2 (0.23%) individuals were homozygous and 80 (9.4%) heterozygous mutation carriers. In the general population controls the prevalence of FLG mutations was 18 (0.18%) and 835 (8.4%) for homozygous and heterozygous mutations, respectively. Fisher's exact test and Pearson's chi square test yielded non-significant p-values when the groups were compared.\nCONCLUSION: FLG mutation was not associated with MM in the studied populations. This finding indicates that epidermal deficiency of filaggrin and its degradation products do not influence the risk of MM significantly. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved."]]
["agac_task3_16", ["Variants of genes encoding collagens and matrix metalloproteinase system increased the risk of aortic dissection.\nAortic dissection (AD) is a devastating, heterogeneous condition of aorta. The homeostasis between collagens and matrix metalloproteases (MMPs)/tissue inhibitors of MMPs (TIMPs) system in the extracellular matrix plays an important role for structure and functions of aorta. However, our knowledge on association between variants of genes in this system and pathogenesis of AD is very limited. We analyzed all yet known coding human genes of collagens (45 genes), MMPs/TIMPs (27 genes) in 702 sporadic AD patients and in 163 matched healthy controls, by using massively targeted next-generation and Sanger sequencing. To define the pathogenesis of potential disease-causing candidate genes, we performed transcriptome sequencing and pedigree co-segregation analysis in some genes and generated Col5a2 knockout rats. We identified 257 pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants which involved 88.89% (64/72) genes in collagens-MMPs/TIMPs system and accounted for 31.05% (218/702) sporadic AD patients. In them, 84.86% patients (185/218) carried one variant, 12.84% two variants and 2.30% more than two variants. Importantly, we identified 52 novel probably pathogenic loss-of-function (LOF) variants (20 nonsense, 16 frameshift, 14 splice sites, one stop-loss, one initiation codon) in 11.06% (50/452) AD patients, which were absent in 163 controls (P=2.5\u00d710(-5)). Transcriptome sequencing revealed that identified variants induced dyshomeostasis in expression of collagens-TIMPs/MMPs systems. The Col5a2 (-/-) rats manifested growth retardation and aortic dysplasia. Our study provides a first comprehensive map of genetic alterations in collagens-MMPs/TIMPs system in sporadic AD patients and suggests that variants of these genes contribute largely to AD pathogenesis."]]
["agac_task3_17", ["Alanine-scanning mutagenesis of human signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 to estimate loss- or gain-of-function variants.\nBACKGROUND: Germline heterozygous mutations in human signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) can cause loss of function (LOF), as in patients with Mendelian susceptibility to mycobacterial diseases, or gain of function (GOF), as in patients with chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. LOF and GOF mutations are equally rare and can affect the same domains of STAT1, especially the coiled-coil domain (CCD) and DNA-binding domain (DBD). Moreover, 6% of patients with chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis with a GOF STAT1 mutation have mycobacterial disease, obscuring the functional significance of the identified STAT1 mutations. Current computational approaches, such as combined annotation-dependent depletion, do not distinguish LOF and GOF variants.\nOBJECTIVE: We estimated variations in the CCD/DBD of STAT1.\nMETHODS: We mutagenized 342 individual wild-type amino acids in the CCD/DBD (45.6% of full-length STAT1) to alanine and tested the mutants for STAT1 transcriptional activity.\nRESULTS: Of these 342 mutants, 201 were neutral, 30 were LOF, and 111 were GOF mutations in a luciferase assay. This assay system correctly estimated all previously reported LOF mutations (100%) and slightly fewer GOF mutations (78.1%) in the CCD/DBD of STAT1. We found that GOF alanine mutants occurred at the interface of the antiparallel STAT1 dimer, suggesting that they destabilize this dimer. This assay also precisely predicted the effect of 2 hypomorphic and dominant negative mutations, E157K and G250E, in the CCD of STAT1 that we found in 2 unrelated patients with Mendelian susceptibility to mycobacterial diseases.\nCONCLUSION: The systematic alanine-scanning assay is a useful tool to estimate the GOF or LOF status and the effect of heterozygous missense mutations in STAT1 identified in patients with severe infectious diseases, including mycobacterial and fungal diseases."]]
["agac_task3_18", ["Alanine-scanning mutagenesis of human signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 to estimate loss- or gain-of-function variants.\nBACKGROUND: Germline heterozygous mutations in human signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) can cause loss of function (LOF), as in patients with Mendelian susceptibility to mycobacterial diseases, or gain of function (GOF), as in patients with chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. LOF and GOF mutations are equally rare and can affect the same domains of STAT1, especially the coiled-coil domain (CCD) and DNA-binding domain (DBD). Moreover, 6% of patients with chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis with a GOF STAT1 mutation have mycobacterial disease, obscuring the functional significance of the identified STAT1 mutations. Current computational approaches, such as combined annotation-dependent depletion, do not distinguish LOF and GOF variants.\nOBJECTIVE: We estimated variations in the CCD/DBD of STAT1.\nMETHODS: We mutagenized 342 individual wild-type amino acids in the CCD/DBD (45.6% of full-length STAT1) to alanine and tested the mutants for STAT1 transcriptional activity.\nRESULTS: Of these 342 mutants, 201 were neutral, 30 were LOF, and 111 were GOF mutations in a luciferase assay. This assay system correctly estimated all previously reported LOF mutations (100%) and slightly fewer GOF mutations (78.1%) in the CCD/DBD of STAT1. We found that GOF alanine mutants occurred at the interface of the antiparallel STAT1 dimer, suggesting that they destabilize this dimer. This assay also precisely predicted the effect of 2 hypomorphic and dominant negative mutations, E157K and G250E, in the CCD of STAT1 that we found in 2 unrelated patients with Mendelian susceptibility to mycobacterial diseases.\nCONCLUSION: The systematic alanine-scanning assay is a useful tool to estimate the GOF or LOF status and the effect of heterozygous missense mutations in STAT1 identified in patients with severe infectious diseases, including mycobacterial and fungal diseases.", "Ruxolitinib reverses dysregulated T helper cell responses and controls autoimmunity caused by a novel signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) gain-of-function mutation.\nBACKGROUND: Gain-of-function (GOF) mutations in the human signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) manifest in immunodeficiency and autoimmunity with impaired TH17\u00a0cell differentiation and exaggerated responsiveness to type I and II interferons. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation has been attempted in severely affected patients, but outcomes have been poor.\nOBJECTIVE: We sought to define the effect of increased STAT1 activity on T helper cell polarization and to investigate the therapeutic potential of ruxolitinib in treating autoimmunity secondary to STAT1 GOF mutations.\nMETHODS: We used in\u00a0vitro polarization assays, as well as phenotypic and functional analysis of STAT1-mutated patient cells.\nRESULTS: We report a child with a novel mutation in the linker domain of STAT1 who had life-threatening autoimmune cytopenias and chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. Naive lymphocytes from the affected patient displayed increased TH1 and follicular T helper cell and suppressed TH17\u00a0cell responses. The mutation augmented cytokine-induced STAT1 phosphorylation without affecting dephosphorylation kinetics. Treatment with the Janus kinase 1/2 inhibitor ruxolitinib reduced hyperresponsiveness to type I and II interferons, normalized TH1 and follicular T helper cell responses, improved TH17 differentiation, cured mucocutaneous candidiasis, and maintained remission of immune-mediated cytopenias.\nCONCLUSIONS: Autoimmunity and infection caused by STAT1 GOF mutations are the result of dysregulated T helper cell responses. Janus kinase inhibitor therapy could represent an effective targeted treatment for long-term disease control in severely affected patients for whom hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is not available.", "Bronchiectasis and Recurrent Respiratory Infections with a De Novo STAT1 Gain-of-Function Variant: First Case in Korea.\nBronchiectasis is a chronic disease characterized by airway infection and inflammation, leading to permanent dilation of the bronchi. Evaluation of underlying etiology is important in managing young bronchiectasis patients with recurrent infections caused by unusual pathogens. The signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) protein plays a key role in STAT signaling and immune system regulation. Heterozygotes for gain-of-function (GOF) alleles of the STAT1 gene usually display autosomal dominant chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis (CMC) and a wide range of clinical features, such as bronchiectasis. Here, we report on a patient with CMC and bronchiectasis with various types of infections who carried a pathogenic variant of the STAT1 gene. The 24-year-old female presented with recurrent respiratory bacterial and nontuberculous mycobacterial infections complicated by severe bronchiectasis and CMC. Whole-exome sequencing revealed a c.800C>T (p.Ala267Val) heterozygous mutation in the STAT1 gene. Further analysis by Sanger sequencing of STAT1 from the patient and her parents revealed the patient had a de novo occurrence of the variant. This is the first report of a Korean patient with a GOF pathogenic variant in STAT1. Physicians should be aware of the existence of this variant as a genetic factor associated with CMC and bronchiectasis complicated by recurrent infection.", "Bronchiectasis and Recurrent Respiratory Infections with a De Novo STAT1 Gain-of-Function Variant: First Case in Korea.\nBronchiectasis is a chronic disease characterized by airway infection and inflammation, leading to permanent dilation of the bronchi. Evaluation of underlying etiology is important in managing young bronchiectasis patients with recurrent infections caused by unusual pathogens. The signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) protein plays a key role in STAT signaling and immune system regulation. Heterozygotes for gain-of-function (GOF) alleles of the STAT1 gene usually display autosomal dominant chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis (CMC) and a wide range of clinical features, such as bronchiectasis. Here, we report on a patient with CMC and bronchiectasis with various types of infections who carried a pathogenic variant of the STAT1 gene. The 24-year-old female presented with recurrent respiratory bacterial and nontuberculous mycobacterial infections complicated by severe bronchiectasis and CMC. Whole-exome sequencing revealed a c.800C>T (p.Ala267Val) heterozygous mutation in the STAT1 gene. Further analysis by Sanger sequencing of STAT1 from the patient and her parents revealed the patient had a de novo occurrence of the variant. This is the first report of a Korean patient with a GOF pathogenic variant in STAT1. Physicians should be aware of the existence of this variant as a genetic factor associated with CMC and bronchiectasis complicated by recurrent infection.", "Bronchiectasis and Recurrent Respiratory Infections with a De Novo STAT1 Gain-of-Function Variant: First Case in Korea.\nBronchiectasis is a chronic disease characterized by airway infection and inflammation, leading to permanent dilation of the bronchi. Evaluation of underlying etiology is important in managing young bronchiectasis patients with recurrent infections caused by unusual pathogens. The signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) protein plays a key role in STAT signaling and immune system regulation. Heterozygotes for gain-of-function (GOF) alleles of the STAT1 gene usually display autosomal dominant chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis (CMC) and a wide range of clinical features, such as bronchiectasis. Here, we report on a patient with CMC and bronchiectasis with various types of infections who carried a pathogenic variant of the STAT1 gene. The 24-year-old female presented with recurrent respiratory bacterial and nontuberculous mycobacterial infections complicated by severe bronchiectasis and CMC. Whole-exome sequencing revealed a c.800C>T (p.Ala267Val) heterozygous mutation in the STAT1 gene. Further analysis by Sanger sequencing of STAT1 from the patient and her parents revealed the patient had a de novo occurrence of the variant. This is the first report of a Korean patient with a GOF pathogenic variant in STAT1. Physicians should be aware of the existence of this variant as a genetic factor associated with CMC and bronchiectasis complicated by recurrent infection.", "Signal transducer and activator of transcription gain-of-function primary immunodeficiency/immunodysregulation disorders.\nPURPOSE OF REVIEW: To describe primary immunodeficiencies caused by gain-of-function (GOF) mutations of signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) genes, a group of genetically determined disorders characterized by susceptibility to infections and, in many cases, autoimmune manifestations.\nRECENT FINDINGS: GOF mutations affecting STAT1 result in increased STAT tyrosine phosphorylation and secondarily increased response to STAT1-signaling cytokines, such as interferons. In contrast, STAT3 hyperactivity is not usually related to hyperphosphorylation but rather to increased STAT3-mediated transcriptional activity. In both cases, heterozygous STAT1 and STAT3 GOF mutations trigger a distinct set of genes in target cells that lead to abnormal functioning of antimicrobial response and/or autoimmunity and result in autosomal dominant diseases.\nSUMMARY: Clinical manifestations of patients with STAT1 GOF are characterized by mucocutaneous candidiasis and recurrent lower tract respiratory infections. In addition, many patients have thyroiditis, type 1 diabetes mellitus, autoimmune cytopenias, cancer or aneurysms. Patients with germline STAT3 GOF mutations have an increased frequency of early-onset multiorgan autoimmunity (i.e. autoimmune enteropathy, type 1 diabetes mellitus, autoimmune interstitial lung disease and autoimmune cytopenias), lymphoproliferation, short stature and, less frequently, severe recurrent infections. Treatment options range from antimicrobial therapy, intravenous or subcutaneous immunoglobulin and immunosuppressive drugs. Some patients with STAT1 GOF disorder have undergone hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, although these have been difficult because of the underlying proinflammatory milieu from the mutation."]]
["agac_task3_19", ["Extracellular inhibitors can attenuate tumorigenic Wnt pathway activity in adenomatous polyposis coli mutants: Predictions of a validated mathematical model.\nBACKGROUND: Despite considerable investigational efforts, no method to overcome the pathogenesis caused by loss of function (LoF) mutations in tumor suppressor genes has been successfully translated to the clinic. The most frequent LoF mutation in human cancers is Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), causing aberrant activation of the Wnt pathway. In nearly all colon cancer tumors, the APC protein is truncated, but still retains partial binding abilities.\nOBJECTIVE & METHODS: Here, we tested the hypothesis that extracellular inhibitors of the Wnt pathway, although acting upstream of the APC mutation, can restore normal levels of pathway activity in colon cancer cells. To this end, we developed and simulated a mathematical model for the Wnt pathway in different APC mutants, with or without the effects of the extracellular inhibitors, Secreted Frizzled-Related Protein1 (sFRP1) and Dickhopf1 (Dkk1). We compared our model predictions to experimental data in the literature.\nRESULTS: Our model accurately predicts T-cell factor (TCF) activity in mutant cells that vary in APC mutation. Model simulations suggest that both sFRP1 and DKK1 can reduce TCF activity in APC1638N/1572T and Apcmin/min mutants, but restoration of normal activity levels is possible only in the former. When applied in combination, synergism between the two inhibitors can reduce their effective doses to one-fourth of the doses required under single inhibitor application. Overall, re-establishment of normal Wnt pathway activity is predicted for every APC mutant in whom TCF activity is increased by up to 11 fold.\nCONCLUSIONS: Our work suggests that extracellular inhibitors can effectively restore normal Wnt pathway activity in APC-truncated cancer cells, even though these LoF mutations occur downstream of the inhibitory action. The insufficient activity of the truncated APC can be quantitatively balanced by the upstream intervention. This new concept of upstream intervention to control the effects of downstream mutations may be considered also for other partial LoF mutations in other signaling pathways."]]
["agac_task3_20", ["Refining genotype-phenotype correlation in Alstr\u00f6m syndrome through study of primary human fibroblasts.\nBACKGROUND: Alstr\u00f6m syndrome (AS), featuring retinal dystrophy, neuronal deafness, cardiomyopathy, metabolic syndrome, and diffuse fibrosis, is caused by biallelic mutations in the centrosomal protein ALMS1. Genotype-phenotype correlation has been suggested without assessment of ALMS1 expression.\nMETHODS: ALMS1 expression (real-time PCR and immunocytochemistry) and cilia formation (immunocytochemistry) were assessed in fibroblasts from deeply phenotyped volunteers diagnosed with AS recruited from a dedicated AS Service. Exome sequencing was used in two participants without convincing biallelic ALMS1 mutations, and BBS2 (Bardet-Biedl syndrome 2) protein expression was assessed in one patient with biallelic BBS2 mutations. Hedgehog-induced GLI1 expression and PDGFA signaling was assessed using quantitative real-time PCR, immunoblotting, or immunostaining of fixed cells after stimulation.\nRESULTS: In 16 of the patient cell lines examined, ALMS1 protein was undetectable (14 with biallelic loss-of-function (LoF) mutations), and in two, ALMS1 staining was equivocal (one with biallelic LoF mutations). In five lines, ALMS1 expression was normal using at least one fixation method (one with biallelic LoF mutations). These differences were not accounted for by major differences in ALMS1 mRNA expression. Exome sequencing of two participants with normal ALMS1 expression identified biallelic LoF BBS2 mutations in one. No second, known ciliopathy mutation was found in the other patient, who had one LoF ALMS1 mutation. Phenotypes were milder or atypical in participants with preserved ALMS1 immunostaining, even when two with likely alternative genetic diagnoses were excluded. All cells studied developed normal cilia, ALMS1 and BBS2 mutant cells showed normal Hedgehog-induced upregulation of GLI1 expression, and PDGFA signaling was normal in ALMS1-deficient cells.\nCONCLUSION: Milder or atypical presentations of AS should prompt genetic evaluation for alternative, clinically overlapping ciliopathies. A subgroup of patients with bona fide ALMS1 defects have milder phenotypes due to residual ALMS1 expression, which may be more important than mutation site."]]
["agac_task3_21", ["ARHGAP29 Mutation Is Associated with Abnormal Oral Epithelial Adhesions.\nNonsyndromic cleft lip and/or palate (NSCL/P) is a prevalent birth defect of complex etiology. Previous studies identified mutations in ARHGAP29 associated with an increased risk for NSCL/P. To investigate the effects of ARHGAP29 in vivo, we generated a novel murine allele by inserting a point mutation identified in a patient with NSCL/P. This single-nucleotide variation of ARHGAP29 translates to an early nonsense mutation (K326X), presumably resulting in loss-of-function (LoF). Embryos from Arhgap29(K326X/+) intercrosses were harvested at various time points. No homozygous Arhgap29(K326X) animals were found in the 45 analyzed litters, assessed as early as embryonic day 8.5 (e8.5). Coronal sectioning of e13.5 and e14.5 heads revealed that 59% of Arhgap29(K326X/+) mice ( n = 37) exhibited improper epithelial contact between developing oral structures, while none were observed in wild types ( n = 10). In addition, Arhgap29(K326X/+) embryos exhibited a significantly higher percentage of maxillary epithelium in contact with mandibular epithelium. Immunofluorescent analyses of the periderm and oral adhesions revealed the presence of Arhgap29 in periderm cells. These cells were p63 negative, keratin 17 positive, and keratin 6 positive and present at sites of adhesion, although occasionally disorganized. Oral adhesions did not appear to impair palatogenesis, as all analyzed Arhgap29(K326X/+) embryos showed confluent palatal mesenchyme and epithelium at e18.5 ( n = 16), and no mice were found with a cleft at birth. Collectively, our data demonstrate that ARHGAP29 is required for embryonic survival and that heterozygosity for LoF variants of Arhgap29 increases the incidence and length of oral adhesions at a critical time point during orofacial development. In conclusion, we validate the LoF nature of the human K326X mutation in vivo and reveal a previously unknown effect of Arhgap29 in murine craniofacial development."]]
["agac_task3_22", ["Modifiers of GRN-Associated Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration.\nHeterozygous loss-of-function (LOF) mutations in the human progranulin gene (GRN) cause frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) by a mechanism of haploinsufficiency. Patients present most frequently with frontotemporal dementia, which is the second most common neurodegenerative dementia at young age. Currently, no disease-modifying therapies are available for these patients. Stimulating GRN protein expression or inhibiting its breakdown is an obvious therapeutic strategy, and is indeed the focus of current preclinical research and clinical trials. Multiple studies have demonstrated the heterogeneity in clinical presentation and wide variability in age of onset in patients carrying a GRN LOF mutation. Recently, this heterogeneity became an opportunity to identify disease modifiers, considering that these might constitute suitable targets for developing disease-modifying or disease-delaying therapies."]]
["agac_task3_23", ["Loss-of-function mutations in QRICH2 cause male infertility with multiple morphological abnormalities of the sperm flagella.\nAberrant sperm flagella impair sperm motility and cause male infertility, yet the genes which have been identified in multiple morphological abnormalities of the flagella (MMAF) can only explain the pathogenic mechanisms of MMAF in a small number of cases. Here, we identify and functionally characterize homozygous loss-of-function mutations of QRICH2 in two infertile males with MMAF from two consanguineous families. Remarkably, Qrich2 knock-out (KO) male mice constructed by CRISPR-Cas9 technology present MMAF phenotypes and sterility. To elucidate the mechanisms of Qrich2 functioning in sperm flagellar formation, we perform proteomic analysis on the testes of KO and wild-type mice. Furthermore, in vitro experiments indicate that QRICH2 is involved in sperm flagellar development through stabilizing and enhancing the expression of proteins related to flagellar development. Our findings strongly suggest that the genetic mutations of human QRICH2 can lead to male infertility with MMAF and that QRICH2 is essential for sperm flagellar formation."]]
["agac_task3_24", ["Variant Prolactin Receptor in Agalactia and Hyperprolactinemia.\nA loss-of-function variant in the gene encoding the prolactin receptor ( PRLR) was reported previously in a woman with persistent postpartum galactorrhea; however, this paradoxical phenotype is not completely understood. Here we describe a 35-year-old woman who presented with idiopathic hyperprolactinemia that was associated with a complete lack of lactation after each of her two deliveries. She is a compound heterozygote for loss-of-function variants of PRLR. Her unaffected parents are heterozygotes. These findings are consistent with previous work showing that mice deficient in functional Prlr do not lactate."]]
["agac_task3_25", ["Association Between Titin Loss-of-Function Variants and Early-Onset Atrial Fibrillation.\nImportance: Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common arrhythmia affecting 1% of the population. Young individuals with AF have a strong genetic association with the disease, but the mechanisms remain incompletely understood.\nObjective: To perform large-scale whole-genome sequencing to identify genetic variants related to AF.\nDesign, Setting, and Participants: The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute's Trans-Omics for Precision Medicine Program includes longitudinal and cohort studies that underwent high-depth whole-genome sequencing between 2014 and 2017 in 18\u202f526 individuals from the United States, Mexico, Puerto Rico, Costa Rica, Barbados, and Samoa. This case-control study included 2781 patients with early-onset AF from 9 studies and identified 4959 controls of European ancestry from the remaining participants. Results were replicated in the UK Biobank (346\u202f546 participants) and the MyCode Study (42\u202f782 participants).\nExposures: Loss-of-function (LOF) variants in genes at AF loci and common genetic variation across the whole genome.\nMain Outcomes and Measures: Early-onset AF (defined as AF onset in persons <66 years of age). Due to multiple testing, the significance threshold for the rare variant analysis was P\u2009=\u20094.55\u2009\u00d7\u200910-3.\nResults: Among 2781 participants with early-onset AF (the case group), 72.1% were men, and the mean (SD) age of AF onset was 48.7 (10.2) years. Participants underwent whole-genome sequencing at a mean depth of 37.8 fold and mean genome coverage of 99.1%. At least 1 LOF variant in TTN, the gene encoding the sarcomeric protein titin, was present in 2.1% of case participants compared with 1.1% in control participants (odds ratio [OR], 1.76 [95% CI, 1.04-2.97]). The proportion of individuals with early-onset AF who carried a LOF variant in TTN increased with an earlier age of AF onset (P value for trend, 4.92\u2009\u00d7\u200910-4), and 6.5% of individuals with AF onset prior to age 30 carried a TTN LOF variant (OR, 5.94 [95% CI, 2.64-13.35]; P\u2009=\u20091.65\u2009\u00d7\u200910-5). The association between TTN LOF variants and AF was replicated in an independent study of 1582 patients with early-onset AF (cases) and 41\u202f200 control participants (OR, 2.16 [95% CI, 1.19-3.92]; P\u2009=\u2009.01).\nConclusions and Relevance: In a case-control study, there was a statistically significant association between an LOF variant in the TTN gene and early-onset AF, with the variant present in a small percentage of participants with early-onset AF (the case group). Further research is necessary to understand whether this is a causal relationship."]]
["agac_task3_26", ["A homozygous loss-of-function mutation leading to CYBC1 deficiency causes chronic granulomatous disease.\nMutations in genes encoding subunits of the phagocyte NADPH oxidase complex are recognized to cause chronic granulomatous disease (CGD), a severe primary immunodeficiency. Here we describe how deficiency of CYBC1, a previously uncharacterized protein in humans (C17orf62), leads to reduced expression of NADPH oxidase's main subunit (gp91phox) and results in CGD. Analyzing two brothers diagnosed with CGD we identify a homozygous loss-of-function mutation, p.Tyr2Ter, in CYBC1. Imputation of p.Tyr2Ter into 155K chip-genotyped Icelanders reveals six additional homozygotes, all with signs of CGD, manifesting as colitis, rare infections, or a severely impaired PMA-induced neutrophil oxidative burst. Homozygosity for p.Tyr2Ter consequently associates with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) in Iceland (P\u2009=\u20098.3\u2009\u00d7\u200910-8; OR\u2009=\u200967.6), as well as reduced height (P\u2009=\u20093.3\u2009\u00d7\u200910-4; -8.5\u2009cm). Overall, we find that CYBC1 deficiency results in CGD characterized by colitis and a distinct profile of infections indicative of macrophage dysfunction."]]
["agac_task3_27", ["Activating human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) gene mutation in bone metastases from breast cancer.\nIn addition to amplification, point mutations of the human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) gene (ERBB2) have been shown to activate the corresponding signaling pathway in breast cancer. The prevalence of ERBB2/HER2 mutation in bone metastasis of breast cancer and the associated phenotype are not known. In this study, bone metastases from breast cancer patients (n\u2009=\u2009231) were analyzed for ERBB2/HER2 mutation. In 7 patients (3%; median age 70\u00a0years, range 50-83\u00a0years), gain-of-function mutations of ERBB2/HER2 were detected. The most frequent mutation was p.L755S (71%). In 29% of mutated cases, p.V777L was found. Lobular breast cancer was present in 71% of mutated cases (n\u2009=\u20095) and in 49% of all samples (n\u2009=\u2009231; p\u2009=\u20090.275). Mutation frequency was 4.4% in the lobular subgroup and 17.4% in the pleomorphic subtype of lobular cancer (n\u2009=\u200923), respectively. All but one mutated lobular cancers were of the pleomorphic subtype (p\u2009=\u20090.006). Mutated cancers belonged either to the luminal (n\u2009=\u20094) or to the triple-negative types (n\u2009=\u20093). With regard to protein expression and gene amplification, HER2 was negative in all mutated cases. Among the 14% of metastatic luminal cancers with estrogen receptor gene (ESR1) mutation, conveying resistance against aromatase inhibitors, no concomitant ERBB2/HER2 mutation occurred. We conclude that activating HER2 mutation is present in about 3% of bone metastases from breast cancers, with significantly higher rates in the pleomorphic subtype of lobular cancer. Since mutated cases appear to be HER2-negative by conventional testing, the opportunity for specific anti-HER2 therapy may be missed."]]
["agac_task3_28", ["Heterogeneous nature of diabetes in a family with a gain-of-function mutation in the ATP-binding cassette subfamily C member 8 (ABCC8) gene.\nGain-of-function ATP-binding cassette subfamily C member 8 (ABCC8) mutations are known to cause neonatal diabetes mellitus and maturity-onset diabetes in the young. However, the intrafamilial heterogeneous nature of diabetes caused by the ABCC8 mutation is not fully understood to date. To clarify the intrafamilial heterogeneous nature of monogenetic diabetes, we conducted a case study on a family with ABCC8 mutations. We investigated eight family members, including a neonatal diabetes patient, based on metabolic features and genetic analysis. All coding exons and exon-intron boundaries of the KCNJ11, ABCC8, GCK, HNF1A, and HNF4A genes were amplified from genomic DNA and directly sequenced. Five gene mutation carriers with ABCC8 (c.1819G>A/p.V607M) were identified in this family, and the onset and severity of diabetes progressively worsened across the three generations. Each of the ABCC8 gene mutation carrier family members were diagnosed with diabetes as follows: the grandfather with type 2 diabetes at 35 years of age, the aunt with slowly-progressive insulin-dependent diabetes at 18 years of age, the mother with ketosis-onset insulin-dependent diabetes at 14 years of age, the sister with impaired glucose tolerance at 9 years of age, and the proband with transient neonatal diabetes at birth. The present study shows the heterogeneous nature of diabetes in a family with a gain-of-function mutation in the ABCC8 gene.", "Heterogeneous nature of diabetes in a family with a gain-of-function mutation in the ATP-binding cassette subfamily C member 8 (ABCC8) gene.\nGain-of-function ATP-binding cassette subfamily C member 8 (ABCC8) mutations are known to cause neonatal diabetes mellitus and maturity-onset diabetes in the young. However, the intrafamilial heterogeneous nature of diabetes caused by the ABCC8 mutation is not fully understood to date. To clarify the intrafamilial heterogeneous nature of monogenetic diabetes, we conducted a case study on a family with ABCC8 mutations. We investigated eight family members, including a neonatal diabetes patient, based on metabolic features and genetic analysis. All coding exons and exon-intron boundaries of the KCNJ11, ABCC8, GCK, HNF1A, and HNF4A genes were amplified from genomic DNA and directly sequenced. Five gene mutation carriers with ABCC8 (c.1819G>A/p.V607M) were identified in this family, and the onset and severity of diabetes progressively worsened across the three generations. Each of the ABCC8 gene mutation carrier family members were diagnosed with diabetes as follows: the grandfather with type 2 diabetes at 35 years of age, the aunt with slowly-progressive insulin-dependent diabetes at 18 years of age, the mother with ketosis-onset insulin-dependent diabetes at 14 years of age, the sister with impaired glucose tolerance at 9 years of age, and the proband with transient neonatal diabetes at birth. The present study shows the heterogeneous nature of diabetes in a family with a gain-of-function mutation in the ABCC8 gene.", "Heterogeneous nature of diabetes in a family with a gain-of-function mutation in the ATP-binding cassette subfamily C member 8 (ABCC8) gene.\nGain-of-function ATP-binding cassette subfamily C member 8 (ABCC8) mutations are known to cause neonatal diabetes mellitus and maturity-onset diabetes in the young. However, the intrafamilial heterogeneous nature of diabetes caused by the ABCC8 mutation is not fully understood to date. To clarify the intrafamilial heterogeneous nature of monogenetic diabetes, we conducted a case study on a family with ABCC8 mutations. We investigated eight family members, including a neonatal diabetes patient, based on metabolic features and genetic analysis. All coding exons and exon-intron boundaries of the KCNJ11, ABCC8, GCK, HNF1A, and HNF4A genes were amplified from genomic DNA and directly sequenced. Five gene mutation carriers with ABCC8 (c.1819G>A/p.V607M) were identified in this family, and the onset and severity of diabetes progressively worsened across the three generations. Each of the ABCC8 gene mutation carrier family members were diagnosed with diabetes as follows: the grandfather with type 2 diabetes at 35 years of age, the aunt with slowly-progressive insulin-dependent diabetes at 18 years of age, the mother with ketosis-onset insulin-dependent diabetes at 14 years of age, the sister with impaired glucose tolerance at 9 years of age, and the proband with transient neonatal diabetes at birth. The present study shows the heterogeneous nature of diabetes in a family with a gain-of-function mutation in the ABCC8 gene."]]
["agac_task3_29", ["The lateral meningocele syndrome mutation causes marked osteopenia in mice.\nLateral meningocele syndrome (LMS) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by neurological complications and osteoporosis. LMS is associated with mutations in exon 33 of NOTCH3 leading to a truncated protein lacking sequences for NOTCH3 degradation and presumably causing NOTCH3 gain of function. To create a mouse model reproducing human LMS-associated mutations, we utilized CRISPR/Cas9 to introduce a tandem termination codon at bases 6691-6696 (ACCAAG\u2192TAATGA) and verified this mutation (Notch3tm1.1Ecan ) by DNA sequencing of F1 mice. One-month-old male and female heterozygous Notch3tm1.1Ecan mice had cancellous and cortical bone osteopenia but exhibited no obvious neurological alterations, and histopathology of multiple organs revealed no abnormalities. Microcomputed tomography of these mutants revealed a 35-60% decrease in cancellous bone volume associated with a reduction in trabecular number and decreased connectivity. During maturation, cancellous and cortical bones were restored in female but not in male mice, which exhibited cancellous bone osteopenia at 4 months. Cancellous bone histomorphometry revealed increased osteoblast and osteocyte numbers and a modest increase in osteoclast surface and bone formation rate. Notch3tm1.1Ecan calvarial osteoblasts had increased proliferation and increased bone \u03b3-carboxyglutamate protein (Bglap) and TNF superfamily member 11 (Tnfsf11) mRNA levels and lower Tnfrsf11b levels. Tnfsf11 mRNA was increased in osteocyte-rich femora from Notch3tm1.1Ecan mice. Cultures of bone marrow-derived macrophages from Notch3tm1.1Ecan mice revealed increased osteoclast formation, particularly in cocultures with osteoblasts from Notch3tm1.1Ecan mice. In conclusion, the Notch3tm1.1Ecan mutation causes osteopenia despite an increase in osteoblast proliferation and function and is associated with enhanced Tnfsf11 expression in osteoblasts and osteocytes."]]
["agac_task3_30", ["Mutational and functional studies on NR5A1 gene in 46,XY disorders of sex development: identification of six novel loss of function mutations.\nOBJECTIVE: To study the functional properties of six novel missense mutations of the NR5A1 gene encoding the steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1) identified in six patients with 46,XY disorders of sex development (DSD) and to describe their relative phenotype-genotype relationship.\nDESIGN: Genetic and functional studies.\nSETTING: University department.\nPATIENT(S): Six 46,XY DSD patients.\nINTERVENTION(S): None.\nMAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Sanger sequencing and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis to identify the mutations or deletions/duplications of the NR5A1 gene. Functional studies by transactivation assays to predict the impact of mutations on molecular function.\nRESULT(S): NR5A1 exons sequencing identified in six 46,XY DSD patients six novel mutations: p.T40R, p.T47C, p.G328W, p.A351E, p.R427W, and p.Q460R. Five missense variants were heterozygous, and one was homozygous (p.R427W). Functional analysis revealed a significant loss of DNA-binding and transactivation ability for all variants, except for p.Q460R, which showed a modest reduced activity compared with that of the wild-type protein. Phenotypes associated with these mutations varied from males with spontaneous puberty, substantial T production, and possible fertility, to females with and without m\u00fcllerian structures and primary amenorrhea.\nCONCLUSION(S): We describe six novel mutations in NR5A1 gene and showed that they might affect protein structure, therefore compromising seriously the SF-1 role in regulating gonadal development. Clinically, we suggest that NR5A1 analysis should be performed whenever atypical sex organs are evidenced or there is an abnormal sexual development, to have proper diagnosis and better management of patients.", "Mutational and functional studies on NR5A1 gene in 46,XY disorders of sex development: identification of six novel loss of function mutations.\nOBJECTIVE: To study the functional properties of six novel missense mutations of the NR5A1 gene encoding the steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1) identified in six patients with 46,XY disorders of sex development (DSD) and to describe their relative phenotype-genotype relationship.\nDESIGN: Genetic and functional studies.\nSETTING: University department.\nPATIENT(S): Six 46,XY DSD patients.\nINTERVENTION(S): None.\nMAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Sanger sequencing and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis to identify the mutations or deletions/duplications of the NR5A1 gene. Functional studies by transactivation assays to predict the impact of mutations on molecular function.\nRESULT(S): NR5A1 exons sequencing identified in six 46,XY DSD patients six novel mutations: p.T40R, p.T47C, p.G328W, p.A351E, p.R427W, and p.Q460R. Five missense variants were heterozygous, and one was homozygous (p.R427W). Functional analysis revealed a significant loss of DNA-binding and transactivation ability for all variants, except for p.Q460R, which showed a modest reduced activity compared with that of the wild-type protein. Phenotypes associated with these mutations varied from males with spontaneous puberty, substantial T production, and possible fertility, to females with and without m\u00fcllerian structures and primary amenorrhea.\nCONCLUSION(S): We describe six novel mutations in NR5A1 gene and showed that they might affect protein structure, therefore compromising seriously the SF-1 role in regulating gonadal development. Clinically, we suggest that NR5A1 analysis should be performed whenever atypical sex organs are evidenced or there is an abnormal sexual development, to have proper diagnosis and better management of patients.", "Mutational and functional studies on NR5A1 gene in 46,XY disorders of sex development: identification of six novel loss of function mutations.\nOBJECTIVE: To study the functional properties of six novel missense mutations of the NR5A1 gene encoding the steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1) identified in six patients with 46,XY disorders of sex development (DSD) and to describe their relative phenotype-genotype relationship.\nDESIGN: Genetic and functional studies.\nSETTING: University department.\nPATIENT(S): Six 46,XY DSD patients.\nINTERVENTION(S): None.\nMAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Sanger sequencing and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis to identify the mutations or deletions/duplications of the NR5A1 gene. Functional studies by transactivation assays to predict the impact of mutations on molecular function.\nRESULT(S): NR5A1 exons sequencing identified in six 46,XY DSD patients six novel mutations: p.T40R, p.T47C, p.G328W, p.A351E, p.R427W, and p.Q460R. Five missense variants were heterozygous, and one was homozygous (p.R427W). Functional analysis revealed a significant loss of DNA-binding and transactivation ability for all variants, except for p.Q460R, which showed a modest reduced activity compared with that of the wild-type protein. Phenotypes associated with these mutations varied from males with spontaneous puberty, substantial T production, and possible fertility, to females with and without m\u00fcllerian structures and primary amenorrhea.\nCONCLUSION(S): We describe six novel mutations in NR5A1 gene and showed that they might affect protein structure, therefore compromising seriously the SF-1 role in regulating gonadal development. Clinically, we suggest that NR5A1 analysis should be performed whenever atypical sex organs are evidenced or there is an abnormal sexual development, to have proper diagnosis and better management of patients.", "Mutational and functional studies on NR5A1 gene in 46,XY disorders of sex development: identification of six novel loss of function mutations.\nOBJECTIVE: To study the functional properties of six novel missense mutations of the NR5A1 gene encoding the steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1) identified in six patients with 46,XY disorders of sex development (DSD) and to describe their relative phenotype-genotype relationship.\nDESIGN: Genetic and functional studies.\nSETTING: University department.\nPATIENT(S): Six 46,XY DSD patients.\nINTERVENTION(S): None.\nMAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Sanger sequencing and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis to identify the mutations or deletions/duplications of the NR5A1 gene. Functional studies by transactivation assays to predict the impact of mutations on molecular function.\nRESULT(S): NR5A1 exons sequencing identified in six 46,XY DSD patients six novel mutations: p.T40R, p.T47C, p.G328W, p.A351E, p.R427W, and p.Q460R. Five missense variants were heterozygous, and one was homozygous (p.R427W). Functional analysis revealed a significant loss of DNA-binding and transactivation ability for all variants, except for p.Q460R, which showed a modest reduced activity compared with that of the wild-type protein. Phenotypes associated with these mutations varied from males with spontaneous puberty, substantial T production, and possible fertility, to females with and without m\u00fcllerian structures and primary amenorrhea.\nCONCLUSION(S): We describe six novel mutations in NR5A1 gene and showed that they might affect protein structure, therefore compromising seriously the SF-1 role in regulating gonadal development. Clinically, we suggest that NR5A1 analysis should be performed whenever atypical sex organs are evidenced or there is an abnormal sexual development, to have proper diagnosis and better management of patients.", "Mutational and functional studies on NR5A1 gene in 46,XY disorders of sex development: identification of six novel loss of function mutations.\nOBJECTIVE: To study the functional properties of six novel missense mutations of the NR5A1 gene encoding the steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1) identified in six patients with 46,XY disorders of sex development (DSD) and to describe their relative phenotype-genotype relationship.\nDESIGN: Genetic and functional studies.\nSETTING: University department.\nPATIENT(S): Six 46,XY DSD patients.\nINTERVENTION(S): None.\nMAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Sanger sequencing and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis to identify the mutations or deletions/duplications of the NR5A1 gene. Functional studies by transactivation assays to predict the impact of mutations on molecular function.\nRESULT(S): NR5A1 exons sequencing identified in six 46,XY DSD patients six novel mutations: p.T40R, p.T47C, p.G328W, p.A351E, p.R427W, and p.Q460R. Five missense variants were heterozygous, and one was homozygous (p.R427W). Functional analysis revealed a significant loss of DNA-binding and transactivation ability for all variants, except for p.Q460R, which showed a modest reduced activity compared with that of the wild-type protein. Phenotypes associated with these mutations varied from males with spontaneous puberty, substantial T production, and possible fertility, to females with and without m\u00fcllerian structures and primary amenorrhea.\nCONCLUSION(S): We describe six novel mutations in NR5A1 gene and showed that they might affect protein structure, therefore compromising seriously the SF-1 role in regulating gonadal development. Clinically, we suggest that NR5A1 analysis should be performed whenever atypical sex organs are evidenced or there is an abnormal sexual development, to have proper diagnosis and better management of patients.", "Mutational and functional studies on NR5A1 gene in 46,XY disorders of sex development: identification of six novel loss of function mutations.\nOBJECTIVE: To study the functional properties of six novel missense mutations of the NR5A1 gene encoding the steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1) identified in six patients with 46,XY disorders of sex development (DSD) and to describe their relative phenotype-genotype relationship.\nDESIGN: Genetic and functional studies.\nSETTING: University department.\nPATIENT(S): Six 46,XY DSD patients.\nINTERVENTION(S): None.\nMAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Sanger sequencing and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis to identify the mutations or deletions/duplications of the NR5A1 gene. Functional studies by transactivation assays to predict the impact of mutations on molecular function.\nRESULT(S): NR5A1 exons sequencing identified in six 46,XY DSD patients six novel mutations: p.T40R, p.T47C, p.G328W, p.A351E, p.R427W, and p.Q460R. Five missense variants were heterozygous, and one was homozygous (p.R427W). Functional analysis revealed a significant loss of DNA-binding and transactivation ability for all variants, except for p.Q460R, which showed a modest reduced activity compared with that of the wild-type protein. Phenotypes associated with these mutations varied from males with spontaneous puberty, substantial T production, and possible fertility, to females with and without m\u00fcllerian structures and primary amenorrhea.\nCONCLUSION(S): We describe six novel mutations in NR5A1 gene and showed that they might affect protein structure, therefore compromising seriously the SF-1 role in regulating gonadal development. Clinically, we suggest that NR5A1 analysis should be performed whenever atypical sex organs are evidenced or there is an abnormal sexual development, to have proper diagnosis and better management of patients."]]
["agac_task3_31", ["Germline mutations and somatic inactivation of TRIM28 in Wilms tumour.\nWilms tumour is a childhood tumour that arises as a consequence of somatic and rare germline mutations, the characterisation of which has refined our understanding of nephrogenesis and carcinogenesis. Here we report that germline loss of function mutations in TRIM28 predispose children to Wilms tumour. Loss of function of this transcriptional co-repressor, which has a role in nephrogenesis, has not previously been associated with cancer. Inactivation of TRIM28, either germline or somatic, occurred through inactivating mutations, loss of heterozygosity or epigenetic silencing. TRIM28-mutated tumours had a monomorphic epithelial histology that is uncommon for Wilms tumour. Critically, these tumours were negative for TRIM28 immunohistochemical staining whereas the epithelial component in normal tissue and other Wilms tumours stained positively. These data, together with a characteristic gene expression profile, suggest that inactivation of TRIM28 provides the molecular basis for defining a previously described subtype of Wilms tumour, that has early age of onset and excellent prognosis."]]
["agac_task3_32", ["Progranulin as a therapeutic target for dementia.\nINTRODUCTION: Progranulin (PGRN) is an acrosomal glycoprotein that is synthesized during spermatogenesis. It is overexpressed in tumors and has anti-inflammatory properties. The protein may be cleaved into granulins which display pro-inflammatory properties. In 2006, mutations in progranulin gene (GRN) that cause haploinsufficiency were found in familial cases of frontotemporal dementia (FTD). Patients with null mutations in GRN display very low-plasma PGRN levels; this analysis is useful for identifying mutation carriers, independent of the clinical presentation, and in those before the appearance of symptoms. Areas covered: Here, we review the current knowledge of PGRN physiological functions and GRN mutations associated with FTD; we also summarize state of the art clinical trials and those compounds able to replace PGRN loss in preclinical models. Expert opinion: PGRN represents a promising therapeutic target for FTD. Cohorts suitable for treatment, ideally at the preclinical stage, where pathogenic mechanisms ongoing in the brain are targeted, are available. However, PGRN may have side effects, such as the risk of tumorigenesis, and the risk/benefit ratio of any intervention cannot be predicted. Furthermore, at present, the situation is complicated by the absence of adequate outcome measures.", "Clinical variability and onset age modifiers in an extended Belgian GRN founder family.\nWe previously reported a granulin (GRN) null mutation, originating from a common founder, in multiple Belgian families with frontotemporal dementia. Here, we used data of a 10-year follow-up study to describe in detail the clinical heterogeneity observed in this extended founder pedigree. We identified 85 patients and 40 unaffected mutation carriers, belonging to 29 branches of the founder pedigree. Most patients (74.4%) were diagnosed with frontotemporal dementia, while others had a clinical diagnosis of unspecified dementia, Alzheimer's dementia or Parkinson's disease. The observed clinical heterogeneity can guide clinical diagnosis, genetic testing, and counseling of mutation carriers. Onset of initial symptomatology is highly variable, ranging from age 45 to 80\u00a0years. Analysis of known modifiers, suggested effects of GRN rs5848, microtubule-associated protein tau H1/H2, and chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 G4C2 repeat length on onset age but explained only a minor fraction of the variability. Contrary, the extended GRN founder family is a valuable source for identifying other onset age modifiers based on exome or genome sequences. These modifiers might be interesting targets for developing disease-modifying therapies."]]
["agac_task3_33", ["De Novo and Inherited Loss-of-Function Variants in TLK2: Clinical and Genotype-Phenotype Evaluation of a Distinct Neurodevelopmental Disorder.\nNext-generation sequencing is a powerful tool for the discovery of genes related to neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Here, we report the identification of a distinct syndrome due to de novo or inherited heterozygous mutations in Tousled-like kinase 2 (TLK2) in 38 unrelated individuals and two affected mothers, using whole-exome and whole-genome sequencing technologies, matchmaker databases, and international collaborations. Affected individuals had a consistent phenotype, characterized by mild-borderline neurodevelopmental delay (86%), behavioral disorders (68%), severe gastro-intestinal problems (63%), and facial dysmorphism including blepharophimosis (82%), telecanthus (74%), prominent nasal bridge (68%), broad nasal tip (66%), thin vermilion of the upper lip (62%), and upslanting palpebral fissures (55%). Analysis of cell lines from three affected individuals showed that mutations act through a loss-of-function mechanism in at least two case subjects. Genotype-phenotype analysis and comparison of computationally modeled faces showed that phenotypes of these and other individuals with loss-of-function variants significantly overlapped with phenotypes of individuals with other variant types (missense and C-terminal truncating). This suggests that haploinsufficiency of TLK2 is the most likely underlying disease mechanism, leading to a consistent neurodevelopmental phenotype. This work illustrates the power of international data sharing, by the identification of 40 individuals from 26 different centers in 7 different countries, allowing the identification, clinical delineation, and genotype-phenotype evaluation of a distinct NDD caused by mutations in TLK2."]]
["agac_task3_34", ["Gain-of-function KCNJ6 Mutation in a Severe Hyperkinetic Movement Disorder Phenotype.\nHere, we describe a fourth case of a human with a de novo KCNJ6 (GIRK2) mutation, who presented with clinical findings of severe hyperkinetic movement disorder and developmental delay, similar to the Keppen-Lubinsky syndrome but without lipodystrophy. Whole-exome sequencing of the patient's DNA revealed a heterozygous de novo variant in the KCNJ6 (c.512T>G, p.Leu171Arg). We conducted in vitro functional studies to determine if this Leu-to-Arg mutation alters the function of GIRK2 channels. Heterologous expression of the mutant GIRK2 channel alone produced an aberrant basal inward current that lacked G protein activation, lost K+ selectivity and gained Ca2+ permeability. Notably, the inward current was inhibited by the Na+ channel blocker QX-314, similar to the previously reported weaver mutation in murine GIRK2. Expression of a tandem dimer containing GIRK1 and GIRK2(p.Leu171Arg) did not lead to any currents, suggesting heterotetramers are not functional. In neurons expressing p.Leu171Arg GIRK2 channels, these changes in channel properties would be expected to generate a sustained depolarization, instead of the normal G protein-gated inhibitory response, which could be mitigated by expression of other GIRK subunits. The identification of the p.Leu171Arg GIRK2 mutation potentially expands the Keppen-Lubinsky syndrome phenotype to include severe dystonia and ballismus. Our study suggests screening for dominant KCNJ6 mutations in the evaluation of patients with severe movement disorders, which could provide evidence to support a causal role of KCNJ6 in neurological channelopathies.", "Gain-of-function KCNJ6 Mutation in a Severe Hyperkinetic Movement Disorder Phenotype.\nHere, we describe a fourth case of a human with a de novo KCNJ6 (GIRK2) mutation, who presented with clinical findings of severe hyperkinetic movement disorder and developmental delay, similar to the Keppen-Lubinsky syndrome but without lipodystrophy. Whole-exome sequencing of the patient's DNA revealed a heterozygous de novo variant in the KCNJ6 (c.512T>G, p.Leu171Arg). We conducted in vitro functional studies to determine if this Leu-to-Arg mutation alters the function of GIRK2 channels. Heterologous expression of the mutant GIRK2 channel alone produced an aberrant basal inward current that lacked G protein activation, lost K+ selectivity and gained Ca2+ permeability. Notably, the inward current was inhibited by the Na+ channel blocker QX-314, similar to the previously reported weaver mutation in murine GIRK2. Expression of a tandem dimer containing GIRK1 and GIRK2(p.Leu171Arg) did not lead to any currents, suggesting heterotetramers are not functional. In neurons expressing p.Leu171Arg GIRK2 channels, these changes in channel properties would be expected to generate a sustained depolarization, instead of the normal G protein-gated inhibitory response, which could be mitigated by expression of other GIRK subunits. The identification of the p.Leu171Arg GIRK2 mutation potentially expands the Keppen-Lubinsky syndrome phenotype to include severe dystonia and ballismus. Our study suggests screening for dominant KCNJ6 mutations in the evaluation of patients with severe movement disorders, which could provide evidence to support a causal role of KCNJ6 in neurological channelopathies."]]
["agac_task3_35", ["Protein kinase C\u03b1 gain-of-function variant in Alzheimer's disease displays enhanced catalysis by a mechanism that evades down-regulation.\nConventional protein kinase C (PKC) family members are reversibly activated by binding to the second messengers Ca2+ and diacylglycerol, events that break autoinhibitory constraints to allow the enzyme to adopt an active, but degradation-sensitive, conformation. Perturbing these autoinhibitory constraints, resulting in protein destabilization, is one of many mechanisms by which PKC function is lost in cancer. Here, we address how a gain-of-function germline mutation in PKC\u03b1 in Alzheimer's disease (AD) enhances signaling without increasing vulnerability to down-regulation. Biochemical analyses of purified protein demonstrate that this mutation results in an \u223c30% increase in the catalytic rate of the activated enzyme, with no changes in the concentrations of Ca2+ or lipid required for half-maximal activation. Molecular dynamics simulations reveal that this mutation has both localized and allosteric effects, most notably decreasing the dynamics of the C-helix, a key determinant in the catalytic turnover of kinases. Consistent with this mutation not altering autoinhibitory constraints, live-cell imaging studies reveal that the basal signaling output of PKC\u03b1-M489V is unchanged. However, the mutant enzyme in cells displays increased sensitivity to an inhibitor that is ineffective toward scaffolded PKC, suggesting the altered dynamics of the kinase domain may influence protein interactions. Finally, we show that phosphorylation of a key PKC substrate, myristoylated alanine-rich C-kinase substrate, is increased in brains of CRISPR-Cas9 genome-edited mice containing the PKC\u03b1-M489V mutation. Our results unveil how an AD-associated mutation in PKC\u03b1 permits enhanced agonist-dependent signaling via a mechanism that evades the cell's homeostatic down-regulation of constitutively active PKC\u03b1."]]
["agac_task3_36", ["De novo and inherited private variants in MAP1B in periventricular nodular heterotopia.\nPeriventricular nodular heterotopia (PVNH) is a malformation of cortical development commonly associated with epilepsy. We exome sequenced 202 individuals with sporadic PVNH to identify novel genetic risk loci. We first performed a trio-based analysis and identified 219 de novo variants. Although no novel genes were implicated in this initial analysis, PVNH cases were found overall to have a significant excess of nonsynonymous de novo variants in intolerant genes (p = 3.27x10-7), suggesting a role for rare new alleles in genes yet to be associated with the condition. Using a gene-level collapsing analysis comparing cases and controls, we identified a genome-wide significant signal driven by four ultra-rare loss-of-function heterozygous variants in MAP1B, including one de novo variant. In at least one instance, the MAP1B variant was inherited from a parent with previously undiagnosed PVNH. The PVNH was frontally predominant and associated with perisylvian polymicrogyria. These results implicate MAP1B in PVNH. More broadly, our findings suggest that detrimental mutations likely arising in immediately preceding generations with incomplete penetrance may also be responsible for some apparently sporadic diseases."]]
["agac_task3_37", ["Mutations in C11orf70 Cause Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia with Randomization of Left/Right Body Asymmetry Due to Defects of Outer and Inner Dynein Arms.\nPrimary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is characterized by chronic airway disease, male infertility, and randomization of the left/right body axis as a result of defects of motile cilia and sperm flagella. We identified loss-of-function mutations in the open-reading frame C11orf70 in PCD individuals from five distinct families. Transmission electron microscopy analyses and high-resolution immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrate that loss-of-function mutations in C11orf70 cause immotility of respiratory cilia and sperm flagella, respectively, as a result of the loss of axonemal outer (ODAs) and inner dynein arms (IDAs), indicating that C11orf70 is involved in cytoplasmic assembly of dynein arms. Expression analyses of C11orf70 showed that C11orf70 is expressed in ciliated respiratory cells and that the expression of C11orf70 is upregulated during ciliogenesis, similar to other previously described cytoplasmic dynein-arm assembly factors. Furthermore, C11orf70 shows an interaction with cytoplasmic ODA/IDA assembly factor DNAAF2, supporting our hypothesis that C11orf70 is a preassembly factor involved in the pathogenesis of PCD. The identification of additional genetic defects that cause PCD and male infertility is of great importance for the clinic as well as for genetic counselling."]]
["agac_task3_38", ["Melanocortin 4 Receptor Pathway Dysfunction in Obesity: Patient Stratification Aimed at MC4R Agonist Treatment.\nContext: The hypothalamic melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) pathway serves a critical role in regulating body weight. Loss of function (LoF) mutations in the MC4R pathway, including mutations in the pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC), prohormone convertase 1 (PCSK1), leptin receptor (LEPR), or MC4R genes, have been shown to cause early-onset severe obesity.\nMethods: Through a comprehensive epidemiological analysis of known and predicted LoF variants in the POMC, PCSK1, and LEPR genes, we sought to estimate the number of US individuals with biallelic MC4R pathway LoF variants.\nResults: We predict ~650 \u03b1-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH)/POMC, 8500 PCSK1, and 3600 LEPR homozygous and compound heterozygous individuals in the United States, cumulatively enumerating >12,800 MC4R pathway-deficient obese patients. Few of these variants have been genetically diagnosed to date. These estimates increase when we include a small subset of less rare variants: \u03b2-MSH/POMC,PCSK1 N221D, and a PCSK1 LoF variant (T640A). To further define the MC4R pathway and its potential impact on obesity, we tested associations between body mass index (BMI) and LoF mutation burden in the POMC, PCSK1, and LEPR genes in various populations. We show that the cumulative allele burden in individuals with two or more LoF alleles in one or more genes in the MC4R pathway are predisposed to a higher BMI than noncarriers or heterozygous LoF carriers with a defect in only one gene.\nConclusions: Our analysis represents a genetically rationalized study of the hypothalamic MC4R pathway aimed at genetic patient stratification to determine which obese subpopulations should be studied to elucidate MC4R agonist (e.g., setmelanotide) treatment responsiveness."]]
["agac_task3_39", ["Melanocortin 4 Receptor Pathway Dysfunction in Obesity: Patient Stratification Aimed at MC4R Agonist Treatment.\nContext: The hypothalamic melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) pathway serves a critical role in regulating body weight. Loss of function (LoF) mutations in the MC4R pathway, including mutations in the pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC), prohormone convertase 1 (PCSK1), leptin receptor (LEPR), or MC4R genes, have been shown to cause early-onset severe obesity.\nMethods: Through a comprehensive epidemiological analysis of known and predicted LoF variants in the POMC, PCSK1, and LEPR genes, we sought to estimate the number of US individuals with biallelic MC4R pathway LoF variants.\nResults: We predict ~650 \u03b1-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH)/POMC, 8500 PCSK1, and 3600 LEPR homozygous and compound heterozygous individuals in the United States, cumulatively enumerating >12,800 MC4R pathway-deficient obese patients. Few of these variants have been genetically diagnosed to date. These estimates increase when we include a small subset of less rare variants: \u03b2-MSH/POMC,PCSK1 N221D, and a PCSK1 LoF variant (T640A). To further define the MC4R pathway and its potential impact on obesity, we tested associations between body mass index (BMI) and LoF mutation burden in the POMC, PCSK1, and LEPR genes in various populations. We show that the cumulative allele burden in individuals with two or more LoF alleles in one or more genes in the MC4R pathway are predisposed to a higher BMI than noncarriers or heterozygous LoF carriers with a defect in only one gene.\nConclusions: Our analysis represents a genetically rationalized study of the hypothalamic MC4R pathway aimed at genetic patient stratification to determine which obese subpopulations should be studied to elucidate MC4R agonist (e.g., setmelanotide) treatment responsiveness."]]
["agac_task3_40", ["Melanocortin 4 Receptor Pathway Dysfunction in Obesity: Patient Stratification Aimed at MC4R Agonist Treatment.\nContext: The hypothalamic melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) pathway serves a critical role in regulating body weight. Loss of function (LoF) mutations in the MC4R pathway, including mutations in the pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC), prohormone convertase 1 (PCSK1), leptin receptor (LEPR), or MC4R genes, have been shown to cause early-onset severe obesity.\nMethods: Through a comprehensive epidemiological analysis of known and predicted LoF variants in the POMC, PCSK1, and LEPR genes, we sought to estimate the number of US individuals with biallelic MC4R pathway LoF variants.\nResults: We predict ~650 \u03b1-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH)/POMC, 8500 PCSK1, and 3600 LEPR homozygous and compound heterozygous individuals in the United States, cumulatively enumerating >12,800 MC4R pathway-deficient obese patients. Few of these variants have been genetically diagnosed to date. These estimates increase when we include a small subset of less rare variants: \u03b2-MSH/POMC,PCSK1 N221D, and a PCSK1 LoF variant (T640A). To further define the MC4R pathway and its potential impact on obesity, we tested associations between body mass index (BMI) and LoF mutation burden in the POMC, PCSK1, and LEPR genes in various populations. We show that the cumulative allele burden in individuals with two or more LoF alleles in one or more genes in the MC4R pathway are predisposed to a higher BMI than noncarriers or heterozygous LoF carriers with a defect in only one gene.\nConclusions: Our analysis represents a genetically rationalized study of the hypothalamic MC4R pathway aimed at genetic patient stratification to determine which obese subpopulations should be studied to elucidate MC4R agonist (e.g., setmelanotide) treatment responsiveness."]]
["agac_task3_41", ["Melanocortin 4 Receptor Pathway Dysfunction in Obesity: Patient Stratification Aimed at MC4R Agonist Treatment.\nContext: The hypothalamic melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) pathway serves a critical role in regulating body weight. Loss of function (LoF) mutations in the MC4R pathway, including mutations in the pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC), prohormone convertase 1 (PCSK1), leptin receptor (LEPR), or MC4R genes, have been shown to cause early-onset severe obesity.\nMethods: Through a comprehensive epidemiological analysis of known and predicted LoF variants in the POMC, PCSK1, and LEPR genes, we sought to estimate the number of US individuals with biallelic MC4R pathway LoF variants.\nResults: We predict ~650 \u03b1-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH)/POMC, 8500 PCSK1, and 3600 LEPR homozygous and compound heterozygous individuals in the United States, cumulatively enumerating >12,800 MC4R pathway-deficient obese patients. Few of these variants have been genetically diagnosed to date. These estimates increase when we include a small subset of less rare variants: \u03b2-MSH/POMC,PCSK1 N221D, and a PCSK1 LoF variant (T640A). To further define the MC4R pathway and its potential impact on obesity, we tested associations between body mass index (BMI) and LoF mutation burden in the POMC, PCSK1, and LEPR genes in various populations. We show that the cumulative allele burden in individuals with two or more LoF alleles in one or more genes in the MC4R pathway are predisposed to a higher BMI than noncarriers or heterozygous LoF carriers with a defect in only one gene.\nConclusions: Our analysis represents a genetically rationalized study of the hypothalamic MC4R pathway aimed at genetic patient stratification to determine which obese subpopulations should be studied to elucidate MC4R agonist (e.g., setmelanotide) treatment responsiveness."]]
["agac_task3_42", ["Germline pathogenic variants in PALB2 and other cancer-predisposing genes in families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer without CDH1 mutation: a whole-exome sequencing study.\nBACKGROUND: Germline pathogenic variants in the E-cadherin gene (CDH1) are strongly associated with the development of hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. There is a paucity of data to guide risk assessment and management of families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer that do not carry a CDH1 pathogenic variant, making it difficult to make informed decisions about surveillance and risk-reducing surgery. We aimed to identify new candidate genes associated with predisposition to hereditary diffuse gastric cancer in affected families without pathogenic CDH1 variants.\nMETHODS: We did whole-exome sequencing on DNA extracted from the blood of 39 individuals (28 individuals diagnosed with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer and 11 unaffected first-degree relatives) in 22 families without pathogenic CDH1 variants. Genes with loss-of-function variants were prioritised using gene-interaction analysis to identify clusters of genes that could be involved in predisposition to hereditary diffuse gastric cancer.\nFINDINGS: Protein-affecting germline variants were identified in probands from six families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer; variants were found in genes known to predispose to cancer and in lesser-studied DNA repair genes. A frameshift deletion in PALB2 was found in one member of a family with a history of gastric and breast cancer. Two different MSH2 variants were identified in two unrelated affected individuals, including one frameshift insertion and one previously described start-codon loss. One family had a unique combination of variants in the DNA repair genes ATR and NBN. Two variants in the DNA repair gene RECQL5 were identified in two unrelated families: one missense variant and a splice-acceptor variant.\nINTERPRETATION: The results of this study suggest a role for the known cancer predisposition gene PALB2 in families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer and no detected pathogenic CDH1 variants. We also identified new candidate genes associated with disease risk in these families.\nFUNDING: UK Medical Research Council (Sackler programme), European Research Council under the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme (2007-13), National Institute for Health Research Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, Experimental Cancer Medicine Centres, and Cancer Research UK."]]
["agac_task3_43", ["Germline pathogenic variants in PALB2 and other cancer-predisposing genes in families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer without CDH1 mutation: a whole-exome sequencing study.\nBACKGROUND: Germline pathogenic variants in the E-cadherin gene (CDH1) are strongly associated with the development of hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. There is a paucity of data to guide risk assessment and management of families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer that do not carry a CDH1 pathogenic variant, making it difficult to make informed decisions about surveillance and risk-reducing surgery. We aimed to identify new candidate genes associated with predisposition to hereditary diffuse gastric cancer in affected families without pathogenic CDH1 variants.\nMETHODS: We did whole-exome sequencing on DNA extracted from the blood of 39 individuals (28 individuals diagnosed with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer and 11 unaffected first-degree relatives) in 22 families without pathogenic CDH1 variants. Genes with loss-of-function variants were prioritised using gene-interaction analysis to identify clusters of genes that could be involved in predisposition to hereditary diffuse gastric cancer.\nFINDINGS: Protein-affecting germline variants were identified in probands from six families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer; variants were found in genes known to predispose to cancer and in lesser-studied DNA repair genes. A frameshift deletion in PALB2 was found in one member of a family with a history of gastric and breast cancer. Two different MSH2 variants were identified in two unrelated affected individuals, including one frameshift insertion and one previously described start-codon loss. One family had a unique combination of variants in the DNA repair genes ATR and NBN. Two variants in the DNA repair gene RECQL5 were identified in two unrelated families: one missense variant and a splice-acceptor variant.\nINTERPRETATION: The results of this study suggest a role for the known cancer predisposition gene PALB2 in families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer and no detected pathogenic CDH1 variants. We also identified new candidate genes associated with disease risk in these families.\nFUNDING: UK Medical Research Council (Sackler programme), European Research Council under the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme (2007-13), National Institute for Health Research Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, Experimental Cancer Medicine Centres, and Cancer Research UK.", "Germline pathogenic variants in PALB2 and other cancer-predisposing genes in families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer without CDH1 mutation: a whole-exome sequencing study.\nBACKGROUND: Germline pathogenic variants in the E-cadherin gene (CDH1) are strongly associated with the development of hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. There is a paucity of data to guide risk assessment and management of families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer that do not carry a CDH1 pathogenic variant, making it difficult to make informed decisions about surveillance and risk-reducing surgery. We aimed to identify new candidate genes associated with predisposition to hereditary diffuse gastric cancer in affected families without pathogenic CDH1 variants.\nMETHODS: We did whole-exome sequencing on DNA extracted from the blood of 39 individuals (28 individuals diagnosed with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer and 11 unaffected first-degree relatives) in 22 families without pathogenic CDH1 variants. Genes with loss-of-function variants were prioritised using gene-interaction analysis to identify clusters of genes that could be involved in predisposition to hereditary diffuse gastric cancer.\nFINDINGS: Protein-affecting germline variants were identified in probands from six families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer; variants were found in genes known to predispose to cancer and in lesser-studied DNA repair genes. A frameshift deletion in PALB2 was found in one member of a family with a history of gastric and breast cancer. Two different MSH2 variants were identified in two unrelated affected individuals, including one frameshift insertion and one previously described start-codon loss. One family had a unique combination of variants in the DNA repair genes ATR and NBN. Two variants in the DNA repair gene RECQL5 were identified in two unrelated families: one missense variant and a splice-acceptor variant.\nINTERPRETATION: The results of this study suggest a role for the known cancer predisposition gene PALB2 in families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer and no detected pathogenic CDH1 variants. We also identified new candidate genes associated with disease risk in these families.\nFUNDING: UK Medical Research Council (Sackler programme), European Research Council under the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme (2007-13), National Institute for Health Research Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, Experimental Cancer Medicine Centres, and Cancer Research UK."]]
["agac_task3_44", ["Biallelic TP53 gain of function mutations in rapidly progressing solid tumors.\nRecent studies are discovering TP53 mutations with gain of function (GOF) properties that promote tumorigenesis via a variety of mechanisms. To our knowledge, all reported compound mutations are allelic. We identified two patients with biallelic GOF TP53 mutations in their tumors and a third with allelic compound variants. The correlation with p53 expression was also examined. Genomic DNA was extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue and mutational analysis was performed using Ion AmpliSeq\u2122Cancer HotSpot Panel V2. Biallelic GOF mutations (p.R273H and p.R273C) were identified in a 19-year-old male with glioblastoma (allele frequencies 94% and 48%) and a 54-year-old with pT3 penile squamous cell carcinoma (allele frequencies 19% and 27%). Immunohistochemistry showed nuclear accumulation of p53. The third patient, a 62-year-old female with metastatic lung adenocarcinoma, had allelic p.P278S (GOF) and p.R283L (non-GOF) variants at frequencies of 61% but with null staining for p53. Germline testing for Patient 1 confirmed wildtype TP53. No other variants were discovered among the genes tested in these cases. All patients succumbed within two years of diagnosis despite aggressive treatment. In conclusion, implementation of TP53 mutation analysis in clinical practice may predict patient outcome, and inhibition of GOF p53 could represent an attractive target for therapy.", "Biallelic TP53 gain of function mutations in rapidly progressing solid tumors.\nRecent studies are discovering TP53 mutations with gain of function (GOF) properties that promote tumorigenesis via a variety of mechanisms. To our knowledge, all reported compound mutations are allelic. We identified two patients with biallelic GOF TP53 mutations in their tumors and a third with allelic compound variants. The correlation with p53 expression was also examined. Genomic DNA was extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue and mutational analysis was performed using Ion AmpliSeq\u2122Cancer HotSpot Panel V2. Biallelic GOF mutations (p.R273H and p.R273C) were identified in a 19-year-old male with glioblastoma (allele frequencies 94% and 48%) and a 54-year-old with pT3 penile squamous cell carcinoma (allele frequencies 19% and 27%). Immunohistochemistry showed nuclear accumulation of p53. The third patient, a 62-year-old female with metastatic lung adenocarcinoma, had allelic p.P278S (GOF) and p.R283L (non-GOF) variants at frequencies of 61% but with null staining for p53. Germline testing for Patient 1 confirmed wildtype TP53. No other variants were discovered among the genes tested in these cases. All patients succumbed within two years of diagnosis despite aggressive treatment. In conclusion, implementation of TP53 mutation analysis in clinical practice may predict patient outcome, and inhibition of GOF p53 could represent an attractive target for therapy.", "Biallelic TP53 gain of function mutations in rapidly progressing solid tumors.\nRecent studies are discovering TP53 mutations with gain of function (GOF) properties that promote tumorigenesis via a variety of mechanisms. To our knowledge, all reported compound mutations are allelic. We identified two patients with biallelic GOF TP53 mutations in their tumors and a third with allelic compound variants. The correlation with p53 expression was also examined. Genomic DNA was extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue and mutational analysis was performed using Ion AmpliSeq\u2122Cancer HotSpot Panel V2. Biallelic GOF mutations (p.R273H and p.R273C) were identified in a 19-year-old male with glioblastoma (allele frequencies 94% and 48%) and a 54-year-old with pT3 penile squamous cell carcinoma (allele frequencies 19% and 27%). Immunohistochemistry showed nuclear accumulation of p53. The third patient, a 62-year-old female with metastatic lung adenocarcinoma, had allelic p.P278S (GOF) and p.R283L (non-GOF) variants at frequencies of 61% but with null staining for p53. Germline testing for Patient 1 confirmed wildtype TP53. No other variants were discovered among the genes tested in these cases. All patients succumbed within two years of diagnosis despite aggressive treatment. In conclusion, implementation of TP53 mutation analysis in clinical practice may predict patient outcome, and inhibition of GOF p53 could represent an attractive target for therapy."]]
["agac_task3_45", ["Biallelic TP53 gain of function mutations in rapidly progressing solid tumors.\nRecent studies are discovering TP53 mutations with gain of function (GOF) properties that promote tumorigenesis via a variety of mechanisms. To our knowledge, all reported compound mutations are allelic. We identified two patients with biallelic GOF TP53 mutations in their tumors and a third with allelic compound variants. The correlation with p53 expression was also examined. Genomic DNA was extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue and mutational analysis was performed using Ion AmpliSeq\u2122Cancer HotSpot Panel V2. Biallelic GOF mutations (p.R273H and p.R273C) were identified in a 19-year-old male with glioblastoma (allele frequencies 94% and 48%) and a 54-year-old with pT3 penile squamous cell carcinoma (allele frequencies 19% and 27%). Immunohistochemistry showed nuclear accumulation of p53. The third patient, a 62-year-old female with metastatic lung adenocarcinoma, had allelic p.P278S (GOF) and p.R283L (non-GOF) variants at frequencies of 61% but with null staining for p53. Germline testing for Patient 1 confirmed wildtype TP53. No other variants were discovered among the genes tested in these cases. All patients succumbed within two years of diagnosis despite aggressive treatment. In conclusion, implementation of TP53 mutation analysis in clinical practice may predict patient outcome, and inhibition of GOF p53 could represent an attractive target for therapy."]]
["agac_task3_46", ["A rare variant in MLKL confers susceptibility to ApoE \u025b4-negative Alzheimer's disease in Hong Kong Chinese population.\nAlzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common neurodegenerative disorders in the elderly. To identify rare genetic factors other than apolipoprotein E \u025b4 allele (ApoE \u025b4) contributing to the pathogenesis of late-onset AD (LOAD), we conducted a whole-exome analysis of 246 ApoE \u025b4-negative LOAD cases and 172 matched controls in Hong Kong Chinese population. LOAD patients showed a significantly higher burden of rare loss-of-function variants in genes related to immune function than healthy controls. Among the genes involved in immune function, we identified a rare stop-gain variant (p.Q48X) in mixed lineage kinase domain like pseudokinase (MLKL) gene present exclusively in 6 LOAD cases. MLKL is expressed in neurons, and the its expression levels in the p.Q48X carriers were significantly lower than that in age-matched wild-type controls. The ratio of A\u03b242 to A\u03b240 significantly increased in MLKL knockdown cells compared to scramble controls. MLKL loss-of-function mutation might contribute to late-onset ApoE \u025b4-negative AD in the Hong Kong Chinese population."]]
["agac_task3_47", ["CBL mutation and MEFV single-nucleotide variant are important genetic predictors of tumor reduction in glucocorticoid-treated patients with chronic myelomonocytic leukemia.\nGlucocorticoid (GC) therapy occasionally relieves tumor-related fever and promotes tumor reduction in patients with chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML). A mutation analysis of 24 patients with CMML revealed the relationship of GC effectiveness, defined as a monocyte reduction of\u2009>\u200950% within 3\u00a0days of methylprednisolone administration, with the MEFV single-nucleotide variant (SNV) and CBL mutation. Lipopolysaccharide-stimulated monocytes harboring MEFV E148Q produced greater amounts of IL-1\u03b2 and TNF-\u03b1 than did wild-type monocytes; this was effectively suppressed by GC. Primary CMML cells harboring the MEFV SNV and CBL mutation, and the myelomonocytic leukemia cell line GDM-1, harboring the CBL mutation, were both more significantly suppressed than non-mutated cells following GC treatment in the presence of GM-CSF. A loss-of-function CBL mutation prolonged STAT5 phosphorylation after GM-CSF stimulation, which was rapidly terminated in both patient samples and GDM-1 cells. In conclusion, GC therapy effectively treats CMML cells harboring the MEFV SNV and CBL mutation by reducing inflammatory cytokine production and terminating prolonged STAT5 phosphorylation in the GM-CSF signaling pathway."]]
["agac_task3_48", ["CBL mutation and MEFV single-nucleotide variant are important genetic predictors of tumor reduction in glucocorticoid-treated patients with chronic myelomonocytic leukemia.\nGlucocorticoid (GC) therapy occasionally relieves tumor-related fever and promotes tumor reduction in patients with chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML). A mutation analysis of 24 patients with CMML revealed the relationship of GC effectiveness, defined as a monocyte reduction of\u2009>\u200950% within 3\u00a0days of methylprednisolone administration, with the MEFV single-nucleotide variant (SNV) and CBL mutation. Lipopolysaccharide-stimulated monocytes harboring MEFV E148Q produced greater amounts of IL-1\u03b2 and TNF-\u03b1 than did wild-type monocytes; this was effectively suppressed by GC. Primary CMML cells harboring the MEFV SNV and CBL mutation, and the myelomonocytic leukemia cell line GDM-1, harboring the CBL mutation, were both more significantly suppressed than non-mutated cells following GC treatment in the presence of GM-CSF. A loss-of-function CBL mutation prolonged STAT5 phosphorylation after GM-CSF stimulation, which was rapidly terminated in both patient samples and GDM-1 cells. In conclusion, GC therapy effectively treats CMML cells harboring the MEFV SNV and CBL mutation by reducing inflammatory cytokine production and terminating prolonged STAT5 phosphorylation in the GM-CSF signaling pathway."]]
["agac_task3_49", ["Species-conserved SYNGAP1 phenotypes associated with neurodevelopmental disorders.\nSYNGAP1 loss-of-function variants are causally associated with intellectual disability, severe epilepsy, autism spectrum disorder and schizophrenia. While there are hundreds of genetic risk factors for neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs), this gene is somewhat unique because of the frequency and penetrance of loss-of-function variants found in patients combined with the range of brain disorders associated with SYNGAP1 pathogenicity. These clinical findings indicate that SYNGAP1 regulates fundamental neurodevelopmental processes that are necessary for brain development. Here, we describe four phenotypic domains that are controlled by Syngap1 expression across vertebrate species. Two domains, the maturation of cognitive functions and maintenance of excitatory-inhibitory balance, are defined exclusively through a review of the current literature. Two additional domains are defined by integrating the current literature with new data indicating that SYNGAP1/Syngap1 regulates innate survival behaviors and brain structure. These four phenotypic domains are commonly disrupted in NDDs, suggesting that a deeper understanding of developmental Syngap1 functions will be generalizable to other NDDs of known or unknown etiology. Therefore, we discuss the known molecular and cellular functions of Syngap1 and consider how these functions may contribute to the emergence of disease-relevant phenotypes. Finally, we identify major unexplored areas of Syngap1 neurobiology and discuss how a deeper understanding of this gene may uncover general principles of NDD pathobiology.", "Species-conserved SYNGAP1 phenotypes associated with neurodevelopmental disorders.\nSYNGAP1 loss-of-function variants are causally associated with intellectual disability, severe epilepsy, autism spectrum disorder and schizophrenia. While there are hundreds of genetic risk factors for neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs), this gene is somewhat unique because of the frequency and penetrance of loss-of-function variants found in patients combined with the range of brain disorders associated with SYNGAP1 pathogenicity. These clinical findings indicate that SYNGAP1 regulates fundamental neurodevelopmental processes that are necessary for brain development. Here, we describe four phenotypic domains that are controlled by Syngap1 expression across vertebrate species. Two domains, the maturation of cognitive functions and maintenance of excitatory-inhibitory balance, are defined exclusively through a review of the current literature. Two additional domains are defined by integrating the current literature with new data indicating that SYNGAP1/Syngap1 regulates innate survival behaviors and brain structure. These four phenotypic domains are commonly disrupted in NDDs, suggesting that a deeper understanding of developmental Syngap1 functions will be generalizable to other NDDs of known or unknown etiology. Therefore, we discuss the known molecular and cellular functions of Syngap1 and consider how these functions may contribute to the emergence of disease-relevant phenotypes. Finally, we identify major unexplored areas of Syngap1 neurobiology and discuss how a deeper understanding of this gene may uncover general principles of NDD pathobiology.", "Species-conserved SYNGAP1 phenotypes associated with neurodevelopmental disorders.\nSYNGAP1 loss-of-function variants are causally associated with intellectual disability, severe epilepsy, autism spectrum disorder and schizophrenia. While there are hundreds of genetic risk factors for neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs), this gene is somewhat unique because of the frequency and penetrance of loss-of-function variants found in patients combined with the range of brain disorders associated with SYNGAP1 pathogenicity. These clinical findings indicate that SYNGAP1 regulates fundamental neurodevelopmental processes that are necessary for brain development. Here, we describe four phenotypic domains that are controlled by Syngap1 expression across vertebrate species. Two domains, the maturation of cognitive functions and maintenance of excitatory-inhibitory balance, are defined exclusively through a review of the current literature. Two additional domains are defined by integrating the current literature with new data indicating that SYNGAP1/Syngap1 regulates innate survival behaviors and brain structure. These four phenotypic domains are commonly disrupted in NDDs, suggesting that a deeper understanding of developmental Syngap1 functions will be generalizable to other NDDs of known or unknown etiology. Therefore, we discuss the known molecular and cellular functions of Syngap1 and consider how these functions may contribute to the emergence of disease-relevant phenotypes. Finally, we identify major unexplored areas of Syngap1 neurobiology and discuss how a deeper understanding of this gene may uncover general principles of NDD pathobiology.", "Species-conserved SYNGAP1 phenotypes associated with neurodevelopmental disorders.\nSYNGAP1 loss-of-function variants are causally associated with intellectual disability, severe epilepsy, autism spectrum disorder and schizophrenia. While there are hundreds of genetic risk factors for neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs), this gene is somewhat unique because of the frequency and penetrance of loss-of-function variants found in patients combined with the range of brain disorders associated with SYNGAP1 pathogenicity. These clinical findings indicate that SYNGAP1 regulates fundamental neurodevelopmental processes that are necessary for brain development. Here, we describe four phenotypic domains that are controlled by Syngap1 expression across vertebrate species. Two domains, the maturation of cognitive functions and maintenance of excitatory-inhibitory balance, are defined exclusively through a review of the current literature. Two additional domains are defined by integrating the current literature with new data indicating that SYNGAP1/Syngap1 regulates innate survival behaviors and brain structure. These four phenotypic domains are commonly disrupted in NDDs, suggesting that a deeper understanding of developmental Syngap1 functions will be generalizable to other NDDs of known or unknown etiology. Therefore, we discuss the known molecular and cellular functions of Syngap1 and consider how these functions may contribute to the emergence of disease-relevant phenotypes. Finally, we identify major unexplored areas of Syngap1 neurobiology and discuss how a deeper understanding of this gene may uncover general principles of NDD pathobiology."]]
["agac_task3_50", ["Biallelic loss-of-function WNT5A mutations in an infant with severe and atypical manifestations of Robinow syndrome.\nRobinow syndrome (RS) is a well-recognized Mendelian disorder known to demonstrate both autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive inheritance. Typical manifestations include short stature, characteristic facies, and skeletal anomalies. Recessive inheritance has been associated with mutations in ROR2 while dominant inheritance has been observed for mutations in WNT5A, DVL1, and DVL3. Through trio whole genome sequencing, we identified a homozygous frameshifting single nucleotide deletion in WNT5A in a previously reported, deceased infant with a unique constellation of features comprising a 46,XY disorder of sex development with multiple congenital malformations including congenital diaphragmatic hernia, ambiguous genitalia, dysmorphic facies, shortened long bones, adactyly, and ventricular septal defect. The parents, who are both heterozygous for the deletion, appear clinically unaffected. In conjunction with published observations of Wnt5a double knockout mice, we provide evidence for the possibility of autosomal recessive inheritance in association with WNT5A loss-of-function mutations in RS."]]
["agac_task3_51", ["Gain-of-function mutations in granulocyte colony-stimulating factor receptor (CSF3R) reveal distinct mechanisms of CSF3R activation.\nGranulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF or CSF3) and its receptor CSF3R regulate granulopoiesis, neutrophil function, and hematopoietic stem cell mobilization. Recent studies have uncovered an oncogenic role of mutations in the CSF3R gene in many hematologic malignancies. To find additional CSF3R mutations that give rise to cell transformation, we performed a cellular transformation assay in which murine interleukin 3 (IL-3)-dependent Ba/F3 cells were transduced with WT CSF3R plasmid and screened for spontaneous growth in the absence of IL-3. Any outgrowth clones were sequenced to identify CSF3R mutations with transformation capacity. We identified several novel mutations and determined that they transform cells via four distinct mechanisms: 1) cysteine- and disulfide bond-mediated dimerization (S581C); 2) polar, noncharged amino acid substitution at the transmembrane helix dimer interface at residue Thr-640; 3) increased internalization by a Glu-524 substitution that mimics a low G-CSF dose; and 4) hydrophobic amino acid substitutions in the membrane-proximal residues Thr-612, Thr-615, and Thr-618. Furthermore, the change in signaling activation was related to an altered CSF3R localization. We also found that CSF3R-induced STAT3 and ERK activations require CSF3R internalization, whereas STAT5 activation occurred at the cell surface. Cumulatively, we have expanded the regions of the CSF3R extracellular and transmembrane domains in which missense mutations exhibit leukemogenic capacity and have further elucidated the mechanistic underpinnings that underlie altered CSF3R expression, dimerization, and signaling activation."]]
["agac_task3_52", ["A Protein-Truncating HSD17B13 Variant and Protection from Chronic Liver Disease.\nBACKGROUND: Elucidation of the genetic factors underlying chronic liver disease may reveal new therapeutic targets.\nMETHODS: We used exome sequence data and electronic health records from 46,544 participants in the DiscovEHR human genetics study to identify genetic variants associated with serum levels of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST). Variants that were replicated in three additional cohorts (12,527 persons) were evaluated for association with clinical diagnoses of chronic liver disease in DiscovEHR study participants and two independent cohorts (total of 37,173 persons) and with histopathological severity of liver disease in 2391 human liver samples.\nRESULTS: A splice variant (rs72613567:TA) in HSD17B13, encoding the hepatic lipid droplet protein hydroxysteroid 17-beta dehydrogenase 13, was associated with reduced levels of ALT (P=4.2\u00d710-12) and AST (P=6.2\u00d710-10). Among DiscovEHR study participants, this variant was associated with a reduced risk of alcoholic liver disease (by 42% [95% confidence interval {CI}, 20 to 58] among heterozygotes and by 53% [95% CI, 3 to 77] among homozygotes), nonalcoholic liver disease (by 17% [95% CI, 8 to 25] among heterozygotes and by 30% [95% CI, 13 to 43] among homozygotes), alcoholic cirrhosis (by 42% [95% CI, 14 to 61] among heterozygotes and by 73% [95% CI, 15 to 91] among homozygotes), and nonalcoholic cirrhosis (by 26% [95% CI, 7 to 40] among heterozygotes and by 49% [95% CI, 15 to 69] among homozygotes). Associations were confirmed in two independent cohorts. The rs72613567:TA variant was associated with a reduced risk of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, but not steatosis, in human liver samples. The rs72613567:TA variant mitigated liver injury associated with the risk-increasing PNPLA3 p.I148M allele and resulted in an unstable and truncated protein with reduced enzymatic activity.\nCONCLUSIONS: A loss-of-function variant in HSD17B13 was associated with a reduced risk of chronic liver disease and of progression from steatosis to steatohepatitis. (Funded by Regeneron Pharmaceuticals and others.)."]]
["agac_task3_53", ["The curious case of G\u03b1s gain-of-function in neoplasia.\nBACKGROUND: Mutations activating the \u03b1 subunit of heterotrimeric Gs protein are associated with a number of highly specific pathological molecular phenotypes. One of the best characterized is the McCune Albright syndrome. The disease presents with an increased incidence of neoplasias in specific tissues.\nMAIN BODY: A similar repertoire of neoplasms can develop whether mutations occur spontaneously in somatic tissues during fetal development or after birth. Glands are the most \"permissive\" tissues, recently found to include the entire gastrointestinal tract. High frequency of activating G\u03b1s mutations is associated with precise diagnoses (e.g., IPMN, Pyloric gland adenoma, pituitary toxic adenoma). Typically, most neoplastic lesions, from thyroid to pancreas, remain well differentiated but may be a precursor to aggressive cancer.\nCONCLUSIONS: Here we propose the possibility that gain-of-function mutations of G\u03b1s interfere with signals in the microenvironment of permissive tissues and lead to a transversal neoplastic phenotype."]]
["agac_task3_54", ["MIB-1 Is Required for Spermatogenesis and Facilitates LIN-12 and GLP-1 Activity in Caenorhabditis elegans.\nCovalent attachment of ubiquitin to substrate proteins changes their function or marks them for proteolysis, and the specificity of ubiquitin attachment is mediated by the numerous E3 ligases encoded by animals. Mind Bomb is an essential E3 ligase during Notch pathway signaling in insects and vertebrates. While Caenorhabditis elegans encodes a Mind Bomb homolog (mib-1), it has never been recovered in the extensive Notch suppressor/enhancer screens that have identified numerous pathway components. Here, we show that C. elegans mib-1 null mutants have a spermatogenesis-defective phenotype that results in a heterogeneous mixture of arrested spermatocytes, defective spermatids, and motility-impaired spermatozoa. mib-1 mutants also have chromosome segregation defects during meiosis, molecular null mutants are intrinsically temperature-sensitive, and many mib-1 spermatids contain large amounts of tubulin. These phenotypic features are similar to the endogenous RNA intereference (RNAi) mutants, but mib-1 mutants do not affect RNAi. MIB-1 protein is expressed throughout the germ line with peak expression in spermatocytes followed by segregation into the residual body during spermatid formation. C. elegans mib-1 expression, while upregulated during spermatogenesis, also occurs somatically, including in vulva precursor cells. Here, we show that mib-1 mutants suppress both lin-12 and glp-1 (C. elegans Notch) gain-of-function mutants, restoring anchor cell formation and a functional vulva to the former and partly restoring oocyte production to the latter. However, suppressed hermaphrodites are only observed when grown at 25\u00b0, and they are self-sterile. This probably explains why mib-1 was not previously recovered as a Notch pathway component in suppressor/enhancer selection experiments."]]
["agac_task3_55", ["Inactivation of Fgfr2 gene in mouse secondary palate mesenchymal cells leads to cleft palate.\nNumerous studies have been conducted to understand the molecular mechanisms controlling mammalian secondary palate development such as growth, reorientation and fusion. However, little is known about the signaling factors regulating palate initiation. Mouse fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptor 2 gene (Fgfr2) is expressed on E11.5 in the palate outgrowth within the maxillary process, in a region that is responsible for palate cell specification and shelf initiation. Fgfr2 continues to express in palate on E12.5 and E13.5 in both epithelial and mesenchymal cells, and inactivation of Fgfr2 expression in mesenchymal cells using floxed Fgfr2 allele and Osr2-Cre leads to cleft palate at various stages including reorientation, horizontal growth and fusion. Notably, some mutant embryos displayed no sign of palate shelf formation suggesting that FGF receptor 2 mediated FGF signaling may play an important role in palate initiation."]]
["agac_task3_56", ["A Gain-of-Function Mutation in EPO in Familial Erythrocytosis.\nFamilial erythrocytosis with elevated erythropoietin levels is frequently caused by mutations in genes that regulate oxygen-dependent transcription of the gene encoding erythropoietin ( EPO). We identified a mutation in EPO that cosegregated with disease with a logarithm of the odds (LOD) score of 3.3 in a family with autosomal dominant erythrocytosis. This mutation, a single-nucleotide deletion (c.32delG), introduces a frameshift in exon 2 that interrupts translation of the main EPO messenger RNA (mRNA) transcript but initiates excess production of erythropoietin from what is normally a noncoding EPO mRNA transcribed from an alternative promoter located in intron 1. (Funded by the Gebert R\u00fcf Foundation and others.)."]]
["agac_task3_57", ["The Arabidopsis thaliana Mediator subunit MED8 regulates plant immunity to Botrytis Cinerea through interacting with the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor FAMA.\nThe Mediator complex is at the core of transcriptional regulation and plays a central role in plant immunity. The MEDIATOR25 (MED25) subunit of Arabidopsis thaliana regulates jasmonate-dependent resistance to Botrytis cinerea through interacting with the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor of jasmonate signaling, MYC2. Another Mediator subunit, MED8, acts independently or together with MED25 in plant immunity. However, unlike MED25, the underlying action mechanisms of MED8 in regulating B. cinerea resistance are still unknown. Here, we demonstrated that MED8 regulated plant immunity to B. cinerea through interacting with another bHLH transcription factor, FAMA, which was previously shown to control the final proliferation/differentiation switch during stomatal development. Our research demonstrates that FAMA is also an essential component of B. cinerea resistance. The fama loss-of-function mutants (fama-1 and fama-2) increased susceptibility to B. cinerea infection and reduced defense-gene expression. On the contrary, transgenic lines constitutively overexpressing FAMA showed opposite B. cinerea responses compared with the fama loss-of-function mutants. FAMA-overexpressed plants displayed enhanced resistance to B. cinerea infection and increased expression levels of defensin genes following B. cinerea treatment. Genetic analysis of MED8 and FAMA suggested that FAMA-regulated pathogen resistance was dependent on MED8. In addition, MED8 and FAMA were both associated with the G-box region in the promoter of ORA59. Our findings indicate that the MED8 subunit of the A. thaliana Mediator regulates plant immunity to B. cinerea through interacting with the transcription factor FAMA, which was discovered to be a key component in B. cinerea resistance."]]
["agac_task3_58", ["The Molecular Chaperone HSP90 Promotes Notch Signaling in the Germline of Caenorhabditis elegans.\nIn a genetic screen to identify genes that promote GLP-1/Notch signaling in Caenorhabditis elegans germline stem cells, we found a single mutation, om40, defining a gene called ego-3. ego-3(om40) causes several defects in the soma and the germline, including paralysis during larval development, sterility, delayed proliferation of germline stem cells, and ectopic germline stem cell proliferation. Whole genome sequencing identified om40 as an allele of hsp-90, previously known as daf-21, which encodes the C. elegans ortholog of the cytosolic form of HSP90. This protein is a molecular chaperone with a central position in the protein homeostasis network, which is responsible for proper folding, structural maintenance, and degradation of proteins. In addition to its essential role in cellular function, HSP90 plays an important role in stem cell maintenance and renewal. Complementation analysis using a deletion allele of hsp-90 confirmed that ego-3 is the same gene. hsp-90(om40) is an I\u2192N conservative missense mutation of a highly conserved residue in the middle domain of HSP-90 RNA interference-mediated knockdown of hsp-90 expression partially phenocopied hsp-90(om40), confirming the loss-of-function nature of hsp-90(om40) Furthermore, reduced HSP-90 activity enhanced the effect of reduced function of both the GLP-1 receptor and the downstream LAG-1 transcription factor. Taken together, our results provide the first experimental evidence of an essential role for HSP90 in Notch signaling in development.", "The Molecular Chaperone HSP90 Promotes Notch Signaling in the Germline of Caenorhabditis elegans.\nIn a genetic screen to identify genes that promote GLP-1/Notch signaling in Caenorhabditis elegans germline stem cells, we found a single mutation, om40, defining a gene called ego-3. ego-3(om40) causes several defects in the soma and the germline, including paralysis during larval development, sterility, delayed proliferation of germline stem cells, and ectopic germline stem cell proliferation. Whole genome sequencing identified om40 as an allele of hsp-90, previously known as daf-21, which encodes the C. elegans ortholog of the cytosolic form of HSP90. This protein is a molecular chaperone with a central position in the protein homeostasis network, which is responsible for proper folding, structural maintenance, and degradation of proteins. In addition to its essential role in cellular function, HSP90 plays an important role in stem cell maintenance and renewal. Complementation analysis using a deletion allele of hsp-90 confirmed that ego-3 is the same gene. hsp-90(om40) is an I\u2192N conservative missense mutation of a highly conserved residue in the middle domain of HSP-90 RNA interference-mediated knockdown of hsp-90 expression partially phenocopied hsp-90(om40), confirming the loss-of-function nature of hsp-90(om40) Furthermore, reduced HSP-90 activity enhanced the effect of reduced function of both the GLP-1 receptor and the downstream LAG-1 transcription factor. Taken together, our results provide the first experimental evidence of an essential role for HSP90 in Notch signaling in development."]]
["agac_task3_59", ["Multifocal atrial and ventricular premature contractions with an increased risk of dilated cardiomyopathy caused by a Nav1.5 gain-of-function mutation (G213D).\nBACKGROUND: SCN5A mutations can lead to different cardiac diseases. Recently, SCN5A mutations have been linked to the clinical entity multifocal ectopic Purkinje-related premature contractions (MEPPC) characterized by ventricular ectopy and dilated cardiomyopathy.\nMETHODS & RESULTS: A family with a uniform MEPPC-like phenotype, associated with complex atrial and ventricular arrhythmias and dilated cardiomyopathy caused by a high frequency of ventricular ectopy was clinically assessed. Screening of the SCN5A gene revealed a missense mutation in the linker between segments 3 and 4 in domain 1 of the Nav1.5 protein, resulting in a glycine to aspartate substitution at position 213 (G213D). The phenotype co-segregated with the missense mutation. Electrophysiological studies of wild type (WT) hNav1.5 and hNav1.5_G213D expressed in CHO-K cells showed that the voltage of half-maximal activation (V\u00bd) was significantly more negative for hNav1.5_G213D compared to WT (V\u00bd=-38.7\u00b10.5mV for WT and V\u00bd=-42.4\u00b10.5mV for G213D; P<0.001). This suggests activation of Nav1.5_G231D at more negative potentials. The V\u00bd of steady-state inactivation was significantly shifted towards more positive values for Nav1.5_G213D (V\u00bd=-86.7\u00b10.2mV for WT and -82.2\u00b10.3mV for G213D; P<0.001), also contributing to a gain-of-function phenotype. Flecainide and amiodarone markedly reduced premature atrial and ventricular contractions in four patients.\nCONCLUSION: The Nav1.5_G213D mutation is associated with a gain-of-function phenotype, multifocal atrial and ventricular ectopy and dilated cardiomyopathy. Since patients with a MEPPC-like phenotype may specifically benefit from Class-1 antiarrhythmic drugs or amiodarone, clinical identification of this disease entity is important."]]
["agac_task3_60", ["Biallelic Mutations in ATP5F1D, which Encodes a Subunit of ATP Synthase, Cause a Metabolic Disorder.\nATP synthase, H+ transporting, mitochondrial F1 complex, \u03b4 subunit (ATP5F1D; formerly ATP5D) is a subunit of mitochondrial ATP synthase and plays an important role in coupling proton translocation and ATP production. Here, we describe two individuals, each with homozygous missense variants in ATP5F1D, who presented with episodic lethargy, metabolic acidosis, 3-methylglutaconic aciduria, and hyperammonemia. Subject 1, homozygous for c.245C>T (p.Pro82Leu), presented with recurrent metabolic decompensation starting in the neonatal period, and subject 2, homozygous for c.317T>G (p.Val106Gly), presented with acute encephalopathy in childhood. Cultured skin fibroblasts from these individuals exhibited impaired assembly of F1FO ATP synthase and subsequent reduced complex V activity. Cells from subject 1 also exhibited a significant decrease in mitochondrial cristae. Knockdown of Drosophila ATPsyn\u03b4, the ATP5F1D homolog, in developing eyes and brains caused a near complete loss of the fly head, a phenotype that was fully rescued by wild-type human ATP5F1D. In contrast, expression of the ATP5F1D c.245C>T and c.317T>G variants rescued the head-size phenotype but recapitulated the eye and antennae defects seen in other genetic models of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation deficiency. Our\u00a0data establish c.245C>T (p.Pro82Leu) and c.317T>G (p.Val106Gly) in ATP5F1D as pathogenic variants leading to a Mendelian mitochondrial disease featuring episodic metabolic decompensation."]]
["agac_task3_61", ["Loss of Function of the Nuclear Receptor NR2F2, Encoding COUP-TF2, Causes Testis Development and Cardiac Defects in 46,XX Children.\nEmerging evidence from murine studies suggests that mammalian sex determination is the outcome of an imbalance between mutually antagonistic male and female regulatory networks that canalize development down one pathway while actively repressing the other. However, in contrast to testis formation, the gene regulatory pathways governing mammalian ovary development have remained elusive. We performed exome or Sanger sequencing on 79 46,XX SRY-negative individuals with either unexplained virilization or with testicular/ovotesticular disorders/differences of sex development (TDSD/OTDSD). We identified heterozygous frameshift mutations in NR2F2, encoding COUP-TF2, in three children. One carried a c.103_109delGGCGCCC (p.Gly35Argfs\u221775) mutation, while two others carried a c.97_103delCCGCCCG (p.Pro33Alafs\u221777) mutation. In two of three children the mutation was de novo. All three children presented with congenital heart disease (CHD), one child with congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH), and two children with blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES). The three children had androgen production, virilization of external genitalia, and biochemical or histological evidence of testicular tissue. We demonstrate a highly significant association between the NR2F2 loss-of-function mutations and this syndromic form of DSD (p = 2.44\u00a0\u00d7 10-8). We show that COUP-TF2 is highly abundant in a FOXL2-negative stromal cell population of the fetal human ovary. In contrast to the mouse, these data establish COUP-TF2 as a human \"pro-ovary\" and \"anti-testis\" sex-determining factor in female gonads. Furthermore, the data presented here provide additional evidence of the emerging importance of nuclear receptors in establishing human ovarian identity and indicate that nuclear receptors may have divergent functions in mouse and human biology.", "Loss of Function of the Nuclear Receptor NR2F2, Encoding COUP-TF2, Causes Testis Development and Cardiac Defects in 46,XX Children.\nEmerging evidence from murine studies suggests that mammalian sex determination is the outcome of an imbalance between mutually antagonistic male and female regulatory networks that canalize development down one pathway while actively repressing the other. However, in contrast to testis formation, the gene regulatory pathways governing mammalian ovary development have remained elusive. We performed exome or Sanger sequencing on 79 46,XX SRY-negative individuals with either unexplained virilization or with testicular/ovotesticular disorders/differences of sex development (TDSD/OTDSD). We identified heterozygous frameshift mutations in NR2F2, encoding COUP-TF2, in three children. One carried a c.103_109delGGCGCCC (p.Gly35Argfs\u221775) mutation, while two others carried a c.97_103delCCGCCCG (p.Pro33Alafs\u221777) mutation. In two of three children the mutation was de novo. All three children presented with congenital heart disease (CHD), one child with congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH), and two children with blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES). The three children had androgen production, virilization of external genitalia, and biochemical or histological evidence of testicular tissue. We demonstrate a highly significant association between the NR2F2 loss-of-function mutations and this syndromic form of DSD (p = 2.44\u00a0\u00d7 10-8). We show that COUP-TF2 is highly abundant in a FOXL2-negative stromal cell population of the fetal human ovary. In contrast to the mouse, these data establish COUP-TF2 as a human \"pro-ovary\" and \"anti-testis\" sex-determining factor in female gonads. Furthermore, the data presented here provide additional evidence of the emerging importance of nuclear receptors in establishing human ovarian identity and indicate that nuclear receptors may have divergent functions in mouse and human biology."]]
["agac_task3_62", ["Loss of Function of the Nuclear Receptor NR2F2, Encoding COUP-TF2, Causes Testis Development and Cardiac Defects in 46,XX Children.\nEmerging evidence from murine studies suggests that mammalian sex determination is the outcome of an imbalance between mutually antagonistic male and female regulatory networks that canalize development down one pathway while actively repressing the other. However, in contrast to testis formation, the gene regulatory pathways governing mammalian ovary development have remained elusive. We performed exome or Sanger sequencing on 79 46,XX SRY-negative individuals with either unexplained virilization or with testicular/ovotesticular disorders/differences of sex development (TDSD/OTDSD). We identified heterozygous frameshift mutations in NR2F2, encoding COUP-TF2, in three children. One carried a c.103_109delGGCGCCC (p.Gly35Argfs\u221775) mutation, while two others carried a c.97_103delCCGCCCG (p.Pro33Alafs\u221777) mutation. In two of three children the mutation was de novo. All three children presented with congenital heart disease (CHD), one child with congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH), and two children with blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES). The three children had androgen production, virilization of external genitalia, and biochemical or histological evidence of testicular tissue. We demonstrate a highly significant association between the NR2F2 loss-of-function mutations and this syndromic form of DSD (p = 2.44\u00a0\u00d7 10-8). We show that COUP-TF2 is highly abundant in a FOXL2-negative stromal cell population of the fetal human ovary. In contrast to the mouse, these data establish COUP-TF2 as a human \"pro-ovary\" and \"anti-testis\" sex-determining factor in female gonads. Furthermore, the data presented here provide additional evidence of the emerging importance of nuclear receptors in establishing human ovarian identity and indicate that nuclear receptors may have divergent functions in mouse and human biology.", "A novel NR2F2 loss-of-function mutation predisposes to congenital heart defect.\nCongenital heart defect (CHD) is the most common type of birth defect in humans and a leading cause of infant morbidity and mortality. Previous studies have demonstrated that genetic defects play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of CHD. However, the genetic basis of CHD remains poorly understood due to substantial genetic heterogeneity. In this study, the coding exons and splicing boundaries of the NR2F2 gene, which encodes a pleiotropic transcription factor required for normal cardiovascular development, were sequenced in 168 unrelated patients with CHD, and a novel mutation (c.247G\u00a0>\u00a0T, equivalent to p.G83X) was detected in a patient with double outlet right ventricle as well as ventricular septal defect. Genetic scanning of the mutation carrier's relatives available showed that the mutation was present in all affected family members but absent in unaffected family members. Analysis of the index patient's pedigree displayed that the mutation co-segregated with CHD, which was transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait with complete penetrance. The nonsense mutation was absent in 230 unrelated, ethnically-matched healthy individuals used as controls. Functional deciphers by using a dual-luciferase reporter assay system revealed that the mutant NR2F2 protein had no transcriptional activity as compared with its wild-type counterpart. Furthermore, the mutation abrogated the synergistic transcriptional activation between NR2F2 and GATA4, another core cardiac transcription factor associated with CHD. This study firstly associates NR2F2 loss-of-function mutation with an increased susceptibility to double outlet right ventricle in humans, which provides further significant insight into the molecular mechanisms underpinning CHD, suggesting potential implications for genetic counseling of CHD families and personalized treatment of CHD patients."]]
["agac_task3_63", ["Bi-allelic inactivating variants in the COCH gene cause autosomal recessive prelingual hearing impairment.\nPathogenic variant in COCH are a known cause of DFNA9 autosomal dominant progressive hearing loss and vestibular dysfunction with adult onset. Hitherto, only dominant nonsynonymous variants and in-frame deletions with a presumed dominant negative or gain-of-function effect have been described. Here, we describe two brothers with congenital prelingual deafness and a homozygous nonsense c.292C>T(p.Arg98*) COCH variant, suggesting a loss-of-function effect. Vestibular dysfunction starting in the first decade was observed in the older patient. The heterozygous parents and sibling have normal hearing and vestibular function, except for the mother, who shows vestibular hyporeflexia and abnormal smooth pursuit tests, most likely due to concomitant disease. This is the first report of autosomal recessive inheritance of cochlea-vestibular dysfunction caused by a pathogenic variant in the COCH gene. An earlier onset of hearing impairment and vestibular dysfunction compared to the dominant hearing loss causing COCH variants is observed.", "Bi-allelic inactivating variants in the COCH gene cause autosomal recessive prelingual hearing impairment.\nPathogenic variant in COCH are a known cause of DFNA9 autosomal dominant progressive hearing loss and vestibular dysfunction with adult onset. Hitherto, only dominant nonsynonymous variants and in-frame deletions with a presumed dominant negative or gain-of-function effect have been described. Here, we describe two brothers with congenital prelingual deafness and a homozygous nonsense c.292C>T(p.Arg98*) COCH variant, suggesting a loss-of-function effect. Vestibular dysfunction starting in the first decade was observed in the older patient. The heterozygous parents and sibling have normal hearing and vestibular function, except for the mother, who shows vestibular hyporeflexia and abnormal smooth pursuit tests, most likely due to concomitant disease. This is the first report of autosomal recessive inheritance of cochlea-vestibular dysfunction caused by a pathogenic variant in the COCH gene. An earlier onset of hearing impairment and vestibular dysfunction compared to the dominant hearing loss causing COCH variants is observed."]]
["agac_task3_64", ["Biallelic inactivating variants in the GTPBP2 gene cause a neurodevelopmental disorder with severe intellectual disability.\nCongenital neurological disorders are genetically highly heterogeneous. Rare forms of hereditary neurological disorders are still difficult to be adequately diagnosed. Pertinent studies, especially when reporting only single families, need independent confirmation. We present three unrelated families in which whole-exome sequencing identified the homozygous non-sense variants c.430[C>T];[C>T] p.(Arg144*), c.1219[C>T];[C>T] p.(Gln407*) and c.1408[C>T];[C>T] p.(Arg470*) in GTPBP2. Their clinical presentations include early onset and apparently non-progressive motor and cognitive impairment, and thereby overlap with findings in a recently described family harbouring a homozygous GTPBP2 splice site variant. Notable differences include structural brain abnormalities (e.g., agenesis of the corpus callosum, exclusive to our patients), and evidence for brain iron accumulation (exclusive to the previously described family). This report confirms pathogenicity of biallelic GTPBP2 inactivation and broadens the phenotypic spectrum. It also underlines that a potential involvement of brain iron accumulation needs clarification. Further patients will have to be identified and characterised in order to fully define the core features of GTPBP2-associated neurological disorder, but future approaches to molecular diagnosis of neurodevelopmental disorders should implement GTPBP2."]]
["agac_task3_65", ["Loss-of-function and gain-of-function mutations in PPP3CA cause two distinct disorders.\nCalcineurin is a calcium (Ca2+)/calmodulin-regulated protein phosphatase that mediates Ca2+-dependent signal transduction. Here, we report six heterozygous mutations in a gene encoding the alpha isoform of the calcineurin catalytic subunit (PPP3CA). Notably, mutations were observed in different functional domains: in addition to three catalytic domain mutations, two missense mutations were found in the auto-inhibitory (AI) domain. One additional frameshift insertion that caused premature termination was also identified. Detailed clinical evaluation of the six individuals revealed clinically unexpected consequences of the PPP3CA mutations. First, the catalytic domain mutations and frameshift mutation were consistently found in patients with nonsyndromic early onset epileptic encephalopathy. In contrast, the AI domain mutations were associated with multiple congenital abnormalities including craniofacial dysmorphism, arthrogryposis and short stature. In addition, one individual showed severe skeletal developmental defects, namely, severe craniosynostosis and gracile bones (severe bone slenderness and perinatal fractures). Using a yeast model system, we showed that the catalytic and AI domain mutations visibly result in decreased and increased calcineurin signaling, respectively. These findings indicate that different functional effects of PPP3CA mutations are associated with two distinct disorders and suggest that functional approaches using a simple cellular system provide a tool for resolving complex genotype-phenotype correlations."]]
["agac_task3_66", ["Loss-of-Function Mutations in UNC45A Cause a Syndrome Associating Cholestasis, Diarrhea, Impaired Hearing, and Bone Fragility.\nDespite the rapid discovery of genes for rare genetic disorders, we continue to encounter individuals presenting with syndromic manifestations. Here, we have studied four affected people in three families presenting with cholestasis, congenital diarrhea, impaired hearing, and bone fragility. Whole-exome sequencing of all affected individuals and their parents identified biallelic mutations in Unc-45 Myosin Chaperone A (UNC45A) as a likely driver for this disorder. Subsequent in\u00a0vitro and in\u00a0vivo functional studies of the candidate gene indicated a loss-of-function paradigm, wherein mutations attenuated or abolished protein activity with concomitant defects in gut development and function.", "Loss-of-Function Mutations in UNC45A Cause a Syndrome Associating Cholestasis, Diarrhea, Impaired Hearing, and Bone Fragility.\nDespite the rapid discovery of genes for rare genetic disorders, we continue to encounter individuals presenting with syndromic manifestations. Here, we have studied four affected people in three families presenting with cholestasis, congenital diarrhea, impaired hearing, and bone fragility. Whole-exome sequencing of all affected individuals and their parents identified biallelic mutations in Unc-45 Myosin Chaperone A (UNC45A) as a likely driver for this disorder. Subsequent in\u00a0vitro and in\u00a0vivo functional studies of the candidate gene indicated a loss-of-function paradigm, wherein mutations attenuated or abolished protein activity with concomitant defects in gut development and function.", "Loss-of-Function Mutations in UNC45A Cause a Syndrome Associating Cholestasis, Diarrhea, Impaired Hearing, and Bone Fragility.\nDespite the rapid discovery of genes for rare genetic disorders, we continue to encounter individuals presenting with syndromic manifestations. Here, we have studied four affected people in three families presenting with cholestasis, congenital diarrhea, impaired hearing, and bone fragility. Whole-exome sequencing of all affected individuals and their parents identified biallelic mutations in Unc-45 Myosin Chaperone A (UNC45A) as a likely driver for this disorder. Subsequent in\u00a0vitro and in\u00a0vivo functional studies of the candidate gene indicated a loss-of-function paradigm, wherein mutations attenuated or abolished protein activity with concomitant defects in gut development and function.", "Loss-of-Function Mutations in UNC45A Cause a Syndrome Associating Cholestasis, Diarrhea, Impaired Hearing, and Bone Fragility.\nDespite the rapid discovery of genes for rare genetic disorders, we continue to encounter individuals presenting with syndromic manifestations. Here, we have studied four affected people in three families presenting with cholestasis, congenital diarrhea, impaired hearing, and bone fragility. Whole-exome sequencing of all affected individuals and their parents identified biallelic mutations in Unc-45 Myosin Chaperone A (UNC45A) as a likely driver for this disorder. Subsequent in\u00a0vitro and in\u00a0vivo functional studies of the candidate gene indicated a loss-of-function paradigm, wherein mutations attenuated or abolished protein activity with concomitant defects in gut development and function."]]
["agac_task3_67", ["Reversal of end-stage heart failure in juvenile hemochromatosis with iron chelation therapy: a case report.\nBACKGROUND: Juvenile hemochromatosis is the most severe form of iron overloading phenotype. Although rare, it should be suspected in patients who present with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, diabetes mellitus, or cardiomyopathy without a clear cause.\nCASE PRESENTATION: A young Serbian male presenting with end-stage heart failure was referred for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. An endomyocardial biopsy revealed cytoplasmic iron deposits in myocytes. His condition was stabilized with biventricular assist devices and he was listed for heart transplantation. Iron chelation therapy was commenced and resulted in rapid removal of iron burden. Serial outpatient echocardiograms demonstrated myocardial recovery such that a successful biventricular assist device explant occurred 131 days after initial implant. Targeted gene sequencing revealed a loss-of-function mutation within the HJV gene, which is consistent with juvenile hemochromatosis.\nCONCLUSIONS: This rare case of a patient with juvenile hemochromatosis associated with a HJV mutation provides histologic evidence documenting the reversal of associated end-stage heart failure, requiring emergent mechanical circulatory support, with iron chelation therapy."]]
["agac_task3_68", ["Internal tandem duplication mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain of FLT3 display a higher oncogenic potential than the activation loop D835Y mutation.\nAcute myeloid leukemia (AML) remains the most common form of acute leukemia among adults and accounts for a large number of leukemia-related deaths. Mutations in FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) is one of the most prevalent findings in this heterogeneous disease. The major types of mutations in FLT3 can be categorized as internal tandem duplications (ITD) and point mutations. Recent studies suggest that ITDs not only occur in the juxtamembrane region as originally described, but also in the kinase domain. Although the juxtamembrane ITDs have been well characterized, the tyrosine kinase domain ITDs have not yet been thoroughly studied due to their recent discovery. For this reason, we compared ITD mutations in the juxtamembrane domain with those in the tyrosine kinase domain, as well as with the most common activating point mutation in the tyrosine kinase domain, D835Y. The purpose of this study was to understand whether it is the nature of the mutation or the location of the mutation that plays the main role in leukemogenesis. The various FLT3 mutants were expressed in the murine pro-B cell line Ba/F3 and examined for their capacity to form colonies in semisolid medium. The size and number of colonies formed by Ba/F3 cells expressing either the internal tandem duplication within juxtamembrane\u00a0domain of the receptor (JMD-ITD) or the tyrosine kinase domain (TKD)-ITD were indistinguishable, while Ba/F3 cells expressing D835Y/FLT3 failed to form colonies. Cell proliferation and cell survival was also significantly higher in TKD-ITD expressing cells, compared to cells expressing D835Y/FLT3. Furthermore, TKD-ITD is capable of inducing phosphorylation of STAT5, while D835Y/FLT3 fails to induce tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5. Other signal transduction pathways such as the RAS/ERK and the PI3K/AKT pathways were activated to the same level in TKD-ITD cells as compared to D835Y/FLT3 expressing cells. Taken together, our data suggest that TKD-ITD displays similar oncogenic potential to the JMD-ITD but a higher oncogenic potential than the D835Y point mutation."]]
["agac_task3_69", ["Congenital diaphragmatic hernia as a part of Nance-Horan syndrome?\nNance-Horan syndrome is a rare X-linked developmental disorder characterized by bilateral congenital cataract, dental anomalies, facial dysmorphism, and intellectual disability. Here, we identify a patient with Nance-Horan syndrome caused by a new nonsense NHS variant. In addition, the patient presented congenital diaphragmatic hernia. NHS gene expression in murine fetal diaphragm was demonstrated, suggesting a possible involvement of NHS in diaphragm development. Congenital diaphragmatic hernia could result from NHS loss of function in pleuroperitoneal fold or in somites-derived muscle progenitor cells leading to an impairment of their cells migration.", "Congenital diaphragmatic hernia as a part of Nance-Horan syndrome?\nNance-Horan syndrome is a rare X-linked developmental disorder characterized by bilateral congenital cataract, dental anomalies, facial dysmorphism, and intellectual disability. Here, we identify a patient with Nance-Horan syndrome caused by a new nonsense NHS variant. In addition, the patient presented congenital diaphragmatic hernia. NHS gene expression in murine fetal diaphragm was demonstrated, suggesting a possible involvement of NHS in diaphragm development. Congenital diaphragmatic hernia could result from NHS loss of function in pleuroperitoneal fold or in somites-derived muscle progenitor cells leading to an impairment of their cells migration."]]
["agac_task3_70", ["Key apoptotic genes APAF1 and CASP9 implicated in recurrent folate-resistant neural tube defects.\nNeural tube defects (NTDs) remain one of the most serious birth defects, and although genes in several pathways have been implicated as risk factors for neural tube defects via knockout mouse models, very few molecular causes in humans have been identified. Whole exome sequencing identified deleterious variants in key apoptotic genes in two families with recurrent neural tube defects. Functional studies in fibroblasts indicate that these variants are loss-of-function, as apoptosis is significantly reduced. This is the first report of variants in apoptotic genes contributing to neural tube defect risk in humans."]]
["agac_task3_71", ["Key apoptotic genes APAF1 and CASP9 implicated in recurrent folate-resistant neural tube defects.\nNeural tube defects (NTDs) remain one of the most serious birth defects, and although genes in several pathways have been implicated as risk factors for neural tube defects via knockout mouse models, very few molecular causes in humans have been identified. Whole exome sequencing identified deleterious variants in key apoptotic genes in two families with recurrent neural tube defects. Functional studies in fibroblasts indicate that these variants are loss-of-function, as apoptosis is significantly reduced. This is the first report of variants in apoptotic genes contributing to neural tube defect risk in humans."]]
["agac_task3_72", ["Biallelic variants in KIF14 cause intellectual disability with microcephaly.\nKinesin proteins are critical for various cellular functions such as intracellular transport and cell division, and many members of the family have been linked to monogenic disorders and cancer. We report eight individuals with intellectual disability and microcephaly from four unrelated families with parental consanguinity. In the affected individuals of each family, homozygosity for likely pathogenic variants in KIF14 were detected; two loss-of-function (p.Asn83Ilefs*3 and p.Ser1478fs), and two missense substitutions (p.Ser841Phe and p.Gly459Arg). KIF14 is a mitotic motor protein that is required for spindle localization of the mitotic citron rho-interacting kinase, CIT, also mutated in microcephaly. Our results demonstrate the involvement of KIF14 in development and reveal a wide phenotypic variability ranging from fetal lethality to moderate developmental delay and microcephaly.", "Biallelic variants in KIF14 cause intellectual disability with microcephaly.\nKinesin proteins are critical for various cellular functions such as intracellular transport and cell division, and many members of the family have been linked to monogenic disorders and cancer. We report eight individuals with intellectual disability and microcephaly from four unrelated families with parental consanguinity. In the affected individuals of each family, homozygosity for likely pathogenic variants in KIF14 were detected; two loss-of-function (p.Asn83Ilefs*3 and p.Ser1478fs), and two missense substitutions (p.Ser841Phe and p.Gly459Arg). KIF14 is a mitotic motor protein that is required for spindle localization of the mitotic citron rho-interacting kinase, CIT, also mutated in microcephaly. Our results demonstrate the involvement of KIF14 in development and reveal a wide phenotypic variability ranging from fetal lethality to moderate developmental delay and microcephaly."]]
["agac_task3_73", ["Clonal evolution mechanisms in NT5C2 mutant-relapsed acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.\nRelapsed acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) is associated with resistance to chemotherapy and poor prognosis. Gain-of-function mutations in the 5'-nucleotidase, cytosolic II (NT5C2) gene induce resistance to 6-mercaptopurine and are selectively present in relapsed ALL. Yet, the mechanisms involved in NT5C2 mutation-driven clonal evolution during the initiation of leukaemia, disease progression and relapse remain unknown. Here we use a conditional-and-inducible leukaemia model to demonstrate that expression of NT5C2(R367Q), a highly prevalent relapsed-ALL NT5C2 mutation, induces resistance to chemotherapy with 6-mercaptopurine at the cost of impaired leukaemia cell growth and leukaemia-initiating cell activity. The loss-of-fitness phenotype of NT5C2+/R367Q mutant cells is associated with excess export of purines to the extracellular space and depletion of the intracellular purine-nucleotide pool. Consequently, blocking guanosine synthesis by inhibition of inosine-5'-monophosphate dehydrogenase (IMPDH) induced increased cytotoxicity against NT5C2-mutant leukaemia lymphoblasts. These results identify the fitness cost of NT5C2 mutation and resistance to chemotherapy as key evolutionary drivers that shape clonal evolution in relapsed ALL and support a role for IMPDH inhibition in the treatment of ALL."]]
["agac_task3_74", ["Recessive loss of function PIGN alleles, including an intragenic deletion with founder effect in La R\u00e9union Island, in patients with Fryns syndrome.\nFryns syndrome (FS) is a multiple malformations syndrome with major features of congenital diaphragmatic hernia, pulmonary hypoplasia, craniofacial dysmorphic features, distal digit hypoplasia, and a range of other lower frequency malformations. FS is typically lethal in the fetal or neonatal period. Inheritance is presumed autosomal recessive. Although no major genetic cause has been identified for FS, biallelic truncating variants in PIGN, encoding a component of the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchor biosynthesis pathway, have been identified in a limited number of cases with a phenotype compatible with FS. Biallelic variants in PIGN, typically missense or compound missense with truncating, also cause multiple congenital anomalies-hypotonia-seizures syndrome 1 (MCAHS1). Here we report six further patients with FS with or without congenital diaphragmatic hernia and recessive loss of function PIGN alleles, including an intragenic deletion with a likely founder effect in La R\u00e9union and other Indian Ocean islands. Our results support the hypothesis that a spectrum of phenotypic severity is associated with recessive PIGN variants, ranging from FS at the extreme end, caused by complete loss of function, to MCAHS1, in which some residual PIGN function may remain. Our data add FS resulting from PIGN variants to the catalog of inherited GPI deficiencies caused by the disruption of the GPI-anchor biosynthesis pathway."]]
["agac_task3_75", ["The gain-of-function mutation E76K in SHP2 promotes CAC tumorigenesis and induces EMT via the Wnt/\u03b2-catenin signaling pathway.\nSHP2 is encoded by the protein tyrosine phosphatase 11 (Ptpn11) gene. Several gain-of-function (GOF) mutations in Ptpn11 have been identified in human hematopoietic malignancies and solid tumors. In addition, the mutation rate for SHP2 is the highest for colorectal cancer (CRC) among solid tumors. The E76K GOF mutation is the most common and active SHP2 mutation; however, the pathogenic effects and function of this mutation in CRC tumor progression have not been well characterized. The Wnt/\u03b2-catenin (CTNNB1) signaling pathway is crucial for CRC, and excessive activation of this pathway has been observed in several tumors. We used Ptpn11E76K conditional knock-in mice to study this GOF mutation in colitis-associated CRC (CAC) and used the CRC cell lines HT29 and HCT116 to determine the relationship between SHP2 and Wnt/\u03b2-catenin signaling. Ptpn11E76K conditional knock-in mice exhibited aggravated inflammation and increased CAC tumorigenesis. In vitro, SHP2E76K and SHP2WT promoted malignant biological behaviors of CRC cells and induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) via the Wnt/\u03b2-catenin signaling pathway. Together, our results showed that SHP2E76K acts as an oncogene that promotes the tumorigenesis and metastasis of CRC."]]
["agac_task3_76", ["Rare loss of function mutations in N-methyl-D-aspartate glutamate receptors and their contributions to schizophrenia susceptibility.\nIn schizophrenia (SCZ) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD), the dysregulation of glutamate transmission through N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors (NMDARs) has been implicated as a potential etiological mechanism. Previous studies have accumulated evidence supporting NMDAR-encoding genes' role in etiology of SCZ and ASD. We performed a screening study for exonic regions of GRIN1, GRIN2A, GRIN2C, GRIN2D, GRIN3A, and GRIN3B, which encode NMDAR subunits, in 562 participates (370 SCZ and 192 ASD). Forty rare variants were identified including 38 missense, 1 frameshift mutation in GRIN2C and 1 splice site mutation in GRIN2D. We conducted in silico analysis for all variants and detected seven missense variants with deleterious prediction. De novo analysis was conducted if pedigree samples were available. The splice site mutation in GRIN2D is predicted to result in intron retention by minigene assay. Furthermore, the frameshift mutation in GRIN2C and splice site mutation in GRIN2D were genotyped in an independent sample set comprising 1877 SCZ cases, 382 ASD cases, and 2040 controls. Both of them were revealed to be singleton. Our study gives evidence in support of the view that ultra-rare variants with loss of function (frameshift, nonsense or splice site) in NMDARs genes may contribute to possible risk of SCZ."]]
["agac_task3_77", ["Cantu syndrome-associated SUR2 (ABCC9) mutations in distinct structural domains result in KATP channel gain-of-function by differential mechanisms.\nThe complex disorder Cantu syndrome (CS) arises from gain-of-function mutations in either KCNJ8 or ABCC9, the genes encoding the Kir6.1 and SUR2 subunits of ATP-sensitive potassium (KATP) channels, respectively. Recent reports indicate that such mutations can increase channel activity by multiple molecular mechanisms. In this study, we determined the mechanism by which KATP function is altered by several substitutions in distinct structural domains of SUR2: D207E in the intracellular L0-linker and Y985S, G989E, M1060I, and R1154Q/R1154W in TMD2. We engineered substitutions at their equivalent positions in rat SUR2A (D207E, Y981S, G985E, M1056I, and R1150Q/R1150W) and investigated functional consequences using macroscopic rubidium (86Rb+) efflux assays and patch-clamp electrophysiology. Our results indicate that D207E increases KATP channel activity by increasing intrinsic stability of the open state, whereas the cluster of Y981S/G985E/M1056I substitutions, as well as R1150Q/R1150W, augmented Mg-nucleotide activation. We also tested the responses of these channel variants to inhibition by the sulfonylurea drug glibenclamide, a potential pharmacotherapy for CS. None of the D207E, Y981S, G985E, or M1056I substitutions had a significant effect on glibenclamide sensitivity. However, Gln and Trp substitution at Arg-1150 significantly decreased glibenclamide potency. In summary, these results provide additional confirmation that mutations in CS-associated SUR2 mutations result in KATP gain-of-function. They help link CS genotypes to phenotypes and shed light on the underlying molecular mechanisms, including consequences for inhibitory drug sensitivity, insights that may inform the development of therapeutic approaches to manage CS."]]
["agac_task3_78", ["Cantu syndrome-associated SUR2 (ABCC9) mutations in distinct structural domains result in KATP channel gain-of-function by differential mechanisms.\nThe complex disorder Cantu syndrome (CS) arises from gain-of-function mutations in either KCNJ8 or ABCC9, the genes encoding the Kir6.1 and SUR2 subunits of ATP-sensitive potassium (KATP) channels, respectively. Recent reports indicate that such mutations can increase channel activity by multiple molecular mechanisms. In this study, we determined the mechanism by which KATP function is altered by several substitutions in distinct structural domains of SUR2: D207E in the intracellular L0-linker and Y985S, G989E, M1060I, and R1154Q/R1154W in TMD2. We engineered substitutions at their equivalent positions in rat SUR2A (D207E, Y981S, G985E, M1056I, and R1150Q/R1150W) and investigated functional consequences using macroscopic rubidium (86Rb+) efflux assays and patch-clamp electrophysiology. Our results indicate that D207E increases KATP channel activity by increasing intrinsic stability of the open state, whereas the cluster of Y981S/G985E/M1056I substitutions, as well as R1150Q/R1150W, augmented Mg-nucleotide activation. We also tested the responses of these channel variants to inhibition by the sulfonylurea drug glibenclamide, a potential pharmacotherapy for CS. None of the D207E, Y981S, G985E, or M1056I substitutions had a significant effect on glibenclamide sensitivity. However, Gln and Trp substitution at Arg-1150 significantly decreased glibenclamide potency. In summary, these results provide additional confirmation that mutations in CS-associated SUR2 mutations result in KATP gain-of-function. They help link CS genotypes to phenotypes and shed light on the underlying molecular mechanisms, including consequences for inhibitory drug sensitivity, insights that may inform the development of therapeutic approaches to manage CS."]]
["agac_task3_79", ["A novel homozygous ARL13B variant in patients with Joubert syndrome impairs its guanine nucleotide-exchange factor activity.\nARL13B encodes for the ADP-ribosylation factor-like 13B GTPase, which is required for normal cilia structure and Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling. Disruptions in cilia structure or function lead to a class of human disorders called ciliopathies. Joubert syndrome is characterized by a wide spectrum of symptoms, including a variable degree of intellectual disability, ataxia, and ocular abnormalities. Here we report a novel homozygous missense variant c.[223G>A] (p.(Gly75Arg) in the ARL13B gene, which was identified by whole-exome sequencing of a trio from a consanguineous family with multiple-affected individuals suffering from intellectual disability, ataxia, ocular defects, and epilepsy. The same variant was also identified in a second family. We saw a striking difference in the severity of ataxia between affected male and female individuals in both families. Both ARL13B and ARL13B-c.[223G>A] (p.(Gly75Arg) expression rescued the cilia length and Shh defects displayed by Arl13b hennin (null) cells, indicating that the variant did not disrupt either ARL13B function. In contrast, ARL13B-c.[223G>A] (p.(Gly75Arg) displayed a marked loss of ARL3 guanine nucleotide-exchange factor activity, with retention of its GTPase activities, highlighting the correlation between its loss of function as an ARL3 guanine nucleotide-exchange factor and Joubert syndrome."]]
["agac_task3_80", ["Patients with a Kabuki syndrome phenotype demonstrate DNA methylation abnormalities.\nKabuki syndrome is a monogenic disorder caused by loss of function variants in either of two genes encoding histone-modifying enzymes. We performed targeted sequencing in a cohort of 27 probands with a clinical diagnosis of Kabuki syndrome. Of these, 12 had causative variants in the two known Kabuki syndrome genes. In 2, we identified presumptive loss of function de novo variants in KMT2A (missense and splice site variants), a gene that encodes another histone modifying enzyme previously exclusively associated with Wiedermann-Steiner syndrome. Although Kabuki syndrome is a disorder of histone modification, we also find alterations in DNA methylation among individuals with a Kabuki syndrome diagnosis relative to matched normal controls, regardless of whether they carry a variant in KMT2A or KMT2D or not. Furthermore, we observed characteristic global abnormalities of DNA methylation that distinguished patients with a loss of function variant in KMT2D or missense or splice site variants in either KMT2D or KMT2A from normal controls. Our results provide new insights into the relationship of genotype to epigenotype and phenotype and indicate cross-talk between histone and DNA methylation machineries exposed by inborn errors of the epigenetic apparatus."]]
["agac_task3_81", ["Patients with a Kabuki syndrome phenotype demonstrate DNA methylation abnormalities.\nKabuki syndrome is a monogenic disorder caused by loss of function variants in either of two genes encoding histone-modifying enzymes. We performed targeted sequencing in a cohort of 27 probands with a clinical diagnosis of Kabuki syndrome. Of these, 12 had causative variants in the two known Kabuki syndrome genes. In 2, we identified presumptive loss of function de novo variants in KMT2A (missense and splice site variants), a gene that encodes another histone modifying enzyme previously exclusively associated with Wiedermann-Steiner syndrome. Although Kabuki syndrome is a disorder of histone modification, we also find alterations in DNA methylation among individuals with a Kabuki syndrome diagnosis relative to matched normal controls, regardless of whether they carry a variant in KMT2A or KMT2D or not. Furthermore, we observed characteristic global abnormalities of DNA methylation that distinguished patients with a loss of function variant in KMT2D or missense or splice site variants in either KMT2D or KMT2A from normal controls. Our results provide new insights into the relationship of genotype to epigenotype and phenotype and indicate cross-talk between histone and DNA methylation machineries exposed by inborn errors of the epigenetic apparatus.", "Molecular and cellular issues of KMT2A variants involved in Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome.\nVariants in KMT2A, encoding the histone methyltransferase KMT2A, are a growing cause of intellectual disability (ID). Up to now, the majority of KMT2A variants are non-sense and frameshift variants causing a typical form of Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome. We studied KMT2A gene in a cohort of 200 patients with unexplained syndromic and non-syndromic ID and identified four novel variants, one splice and three missense variants, possibly deleterious. We used primary cells from the patients and molecular approaches to determine the deleterious effects of those variants on KMT2A expression and function. For the putative splice variant c.11322-1G>A, we showed that it led to only one nucleotide deletion and loss of the C-terminal part of the protein. For two studied KMT2A missense variants, c.3460C>T (p.(Arg1154Trp)) and c.8558T>G (p.(Met2853Arg)), located at the cysteine-rich CXXC domain and the transactivation domain of the protein, respectively, we found altered KMT2A target genes expression in patient's fibroblasts compared to controls. Furthermore, we found a disturbed subcellular distribution of KMT2A for the c.3460C>T mutant. Taken together, our results demonstrated the deleterious impact of the splice variant and of the missense variants located at two different functional domains and suggested reduction of KMT2A function as the disease-causing mechanism."]]
["agac_task3_82", ["Primary Ovarian Insufficiency and Azoospermia in Carriers of a Homozygous PSMC3IP Stop Gain Mutation.\nContext: The etiology of primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) remains unknown in most cases.\nObjective: We sought to identify the genes causing POI.\nDesign: The study was a familial genetic study.\nSetting: The study was performed at two academic institutions.\nPatients: We identified a consanguineous Yemeni family in which four daughters had POI. A brother had azoospermia.\nIntervention: DNA was subjected to whole genome sequencing. Shared regions of homozygosity were identified using Truploidy and prioritized using the Variant Annotation, Analysis, and Search Tool with control data from 387 healthy subjects. Imaging and quantification of protein localization and mitochondrial function were examined in cell lines.\nMain Outcome: Homozygous recessive gene variants shared by the four sisters.\nResults: The sisters shared a homozygous stop gain mutation in exon 6 of PSMC3IP (c.489 C>G, p.Tyr163Ter) and a missense variant in exon 1 of CLPP (c.100C>T, p.Pro34Ser). The affected brother also carried the homozygous PSMC3IP mutation. Functional studies demonstrated mitochondrial fragmentation in cells infected with the CLPP mutation. However, no abnormality was found in mitochondrial targeting or respiration.\nConclusions: The PSMC3IP mutation provides additional evidence that mutations in meiotic homologous recombination and DNA repair genes result in distinct female and male reproductive phenotypes, including delayed puberty and primary amenorrhea caused by POI (XX gonadal dysgenesis) in females but isolated azoospermia with normal pubertal development in males. The findings also suggest that the N-terminal missense mutation in CLPP does not cause substantial mitochondrial dysfunction or contribute to ovarian insufficiency in an oligogenic manner.", "Primary Ovarian Insufficiency and Azoospermia in Carriers of a Homozygous PSMC3IP Stop Gain Mutation.\nContext: The etiology of primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) remains unknown in most cases.\nObjective: We sought to identify the genes causing POI.\nDesign: The study was a familial genetic study.\nSetting: The study was performed at two academic institutions.\nPatients: We identified a consanguineous Yemeni family in which four daughters had POI. A brother had azoospermia.\nIntervention: DNA was subjected to whole genome sequencing. Shared regions of homozygosity were identified using Truploidy and prioritized using the Variant Annotation, Analysis, and Search Tool with control data from 387 healthy subjects. Imaging and quantification of protein localization and mitochondrial function were examined in cell lines.\nMain Outcome: Homozygous recessive gene variants shared by the four sisters.\nResults: The sisters shared a homozygous stop gain mutation in exon 6 of PSMC3IP (c.489 C>G, p.Tyr163Ter) and a missense variant in exon 1 of CLPP (c.100C>T, p.Pro34Ser). The affected brother also carried the homozygous PSMC3IP mutation. Functional studies demonstrated mitochondrial fragmentation in cells infected with the CLPP mutation. However, no abnormality was found in mitochondrial targeting or respiration.\nConclusions: The PSMC3IP mutation provides additional evidence that mutations in meiotic homologous recombination and DNA repair genes result in distinct female and male reproductive phenotypes, including delayed puberty and primary amenorrhea caused by POI (XX gonadal dysgenesis) in females but isolated azoospermia with normal pubertal development in males. The findings also suggest that the N-terminal missense mutation in CLPP does not cause substantial mitochondrial dysfunction or contribute to ovarian insufficiency in an oligogenic manner."]]
["agac_task3_83", ["Deleterious variants in DCHS1 are prevalent in sporadic cases of mitral valve prolapse.\nBACKGROUND: A recent study identified DCHS1 as a causal gene for mitral valve prolapse. The goal of this study is to investigate the presence and frequency of known and novel variants in this gene in 100 asymptomatic patients with moderate to severe organic mitral regurgitation.\nMETHODS: DNA sequencing assays were developed for two previously identified functional missense variants, namely p.R2330C and p.R2513H, and all 21 exons of DCHS1. Pathogenicity of variants was evaluated in silico.\nRESULTS: p.R2330C and p.R2513H were not identified in this cohort. Sequencing all coding regions revealed eight missense variants including six considered deleterious. This includes one novel variant (p.A2464P) and two rare variants (p.R2770Q and p.R2462Q). These variants are predicted to be deleterious with combined annotation-dependent depletion (CADD) scores greater than 25, which are in the same range as p.R2330C (CADD\u00a0=\u00a028.0) and p.R2513H (CADD\u00a0=\u00a024.3). More globally, 24 of 100 cases were carriers of at least one in silico-predicted deleterious missense variant in DCHS1, suggesting that this single gene may account for a substantial portion of cases.\nCONCLUSION: This study reveals an important contribution of germline variants in DCHS1 in unrelated patients with mitral valve prolapse and supports genetic testing of this gene to screen individuals at risk."]]
["agac_task3_84", ["Potential pathogenic mechanisms underlying Fragile X Tremor Ataxia Syndrome: RAN translation and/or RNA gain-of-function?\nFragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) is an inherited neurodegenerative disease caused by an expansion of 55-200 CGG repeats located in the FMR1 gene. The main clinical and neuropathological features of FXTAS are progressive intention tremor and gait ataxia associated with brain atrophy, neuronal cell loss and presence of ubiquitin-positive intranuclear inclusions in both neurons and astrocytes. At the molecular level, FXTAS is characterized by increased expression of FMR1 sense and antisense RNA containing expanded CGG or GGC repeats, respectively. Here, we discuss the putative molecular mechanisms underlying FXTAS and notably recent reports that expanded CGG and GGC repeats may be pathogenic through RAN translation into toxic proteins."]]
["agac_task3_85", ["First Report of Prenatal Ascertainment of a Fetus With Homozygous Loss of the SOX10 Gene and Phenotypic Correlation by Autopsy Examination.\nThe SOX10 gene plays a vital role in neural crest cell development and migration. Abnormalities in SOX10 are associated with Waardenburg syndrome Types II and IV, and these patients have recognizable clinical features. This case report highlights the first ever reported homozygous loss of function of the SOX10 gene in a human. This deletion is correlated using family history, prenatal ultrasound, microarray analysis of amniotic fluid, and ultimately, a medical autopsy examination to further elucidate phenotypic effects of this genetic variation. Incorporating the use of molecular pathology into the autopsy examination of fetuses with suspected congenital anomalies is vital for appropriate family counseling, and with the ability to use formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissues, has become a practical approach in autopsy pathology.", "First Report of Prenatal Ascertainment of a Fetus With Homozygous Loss of the SOX10 Gene and Phenotypic Correlation by Autopsy Examination.\nThe SOX10 gene plays a vital role in neural crest cell development and migration. Abnormalities in SOX10 are associated with Waardenburg syndrome Types II and IV, and these patients have recognizable clinical features. This case report highlights the first ever reported homozygous loss of function of the SOX10 gene in a human. This deletion is correlated using family history, prenatal ultrasound, microarray analysis of amniotic fluid, and ultimately, a medical autopsy examination to further elucidate phenotypic effects of this genetic variation. Incorporating the use of molecular pathology into the autopsy examination of fetuses with suspected congenital anomalies is vital for appropriate family counseling, and with the ability to use formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissues, has become a practical approach in autopsy pathology."]]
["agac_task3_86", ["Loss-of-activity-mutation in the cardiac chloride-bicarbonate exchanger AE3 causes short QT syndrome.\nPatients with short QT syndrome (SQTS) may present with syncope, ventricular fibrillation or sudden cardiac death. Six SQTS susceptibility genes, encoding cation channels, explain <25% of SQTS cases. Here we identify a missense mutation in the anion exchanger (AE3)-encoding SLC4A3 gene in two unrelated families with SQTS. The mutation causes reduced surface expression of AE3 and reduced membrane bicarbonate transport. Slc4a3 knockdown in zebrafish causes increased cardiac pHi, short QTc, and reduced systolic duration, which is rescued by wildtype but not mutated SLC4A3. Mechanistic analyses suggest that an increase in pHi and decrease in [Cl-]i shortened the action potential duration. However, other mechanisms may also play a role. Altered anion transport represents a mechanism for development of arrhythmia and may provide new therapeutic possibilities."]]
["agac_task3_87", ["MED13L loss-of-function variants in two patients with syndromic Pierre Robin sequence.\nWe report two unrelated patients with Pierre Robin sequence (PRS) and a strikingly similar combination of associated features. Whole exome sequencing was performed for both patients. No single gene containing likely pathogenic point mutations in both patients could be identified, but the finding of an essential splice site mutation in mediator complex subunit 13 like (MED13L) in one patient prompted the investigation of copy number variants in MED13L in the other, leading to the identification of an intragenic deletion. Disruption of MED13L, encoding a component of the Mediator complex, is increasingly recognized as the cause of an intellectual disability syndrome with associated facial dysmorphism. Our findings suggest that MED13L-related disorders are a possible differential diagnosis for syndromic PRS."]]
["agac_task3_88", ["MED13L loss-of-function variants in two patients with syndromic Pierre Robin sequence.\nWe report two unrelated patients with Pierre Robin sequence (PRS) and a strikingly similar combination of associated features. Whole exome sequencing was performed for both patients. No single gene containing likely pathogenic point mutations in both patients could be identified, but the finding of an essential splice site mutation in mediator complex subunit 13 like (MED13L) in one patient prompted the investigation of copy number variants in MED13L in the other, leading to the identification of an intragenic deletion. Disruption of MED13L, encoding a component of the Mediator complex, is increasingly recognized as the cause of an intellectual disability syndrome with associated facial dysmorphism. Our findings suggest that MED13L-related disorders are a possible differential diagnosis for syndromic PRS.", "MED13L loss-of-function variants in two patients with syndromic Pierre Robin sequence.\nWe report two unrelated patients with Pierre Robin sequence (PRS) and a strikingly similar combination of associated features. Whole exome sequencing was performed for both patients. No single gene containing likely pathogenic point mutations in both patients could be identified, but the finding of an essential splice site mutation in mediator complex subunit 13 like (MED13L) in one patient prompted the investigation of copy number variants in MED13L in the other, leading to the identification of an intragenic deletion. Disruption of MED13L, encoding a component of the Mediator complex, is increasingly recognized as the cause of an intellectual disability syndrome with associated facial dysmorphism. Our findings suggest that MED13L-related disorders are a possible differential diagnosis for syndromic PRS."]]
["agac_task3_89", ["Polymorphisms in inflammasome genes and risk of asthma in Brazilian children.\nConsidering its role in inflammation and recently described \"alternative\" roles in epithelial homeostasis and Th1/Th2 balance, we hypothesize that inflammasome genetics could contribute to the development of asthma. Selected functional polymorphisms in inflammasome genes are evaluated in a cohort of asthmatic children and their families. Gain-of-function NLRP1 variants rs11651270, rs12150220 and rs2670660 resulted significantly associated to asthma in trios (TDT) analysis; and rs11651270 and rs2670660 also with asthma severity and total IgE level in asthmatic children. NLRP1 activators in humans are still unknown, however we hypothesized that individuals with gain-of-function SNPs in NLRP1 could be more prone in activating inflammasome in the presence of asthma-related cell stressors (i.e. ER stress or ROS), and this activation contribute to exacerbate inflammatory response and asthma development. Gain-of-function IL1A rs17561 resulted significantly associated with a reduced pulmonary capacity in asthmatic children. IL18 rs5744256 which lead to lower serum level of IL-18 appeared to be associated to a worse response to bronchodilators. Concluding, this work provides evidences about the contribution of inflammasome genetics in the development of paediatric asthma, both considering its inflammatory role in alveolar macrophages (i.e.: NLRP1) or its homeostatic role in lung epithelial cells (i.e.: IL1A, IL18)."]]
["agac_task3_90", ["Polymorphisms in inflammasome genes and risk of asthma in Brazilian children.\nConsidering its role in inflammation and recently described \"alternative\" roles in epithelial homeostasis and Th1/Th2 balance, we hypothesize that inflammasome genetics could contribute to the development of asthma. Selected functional polymorphisms in inflammasome genes are evaluated in a cohort of asthmatic children and their families. Gain-of-function NLRP1 variants rs11651270, rs12150220 and rs2670660 resulted significantly associated to asthma in trios (TDT) analysis; and rs11651270 and rs2670660 also with asthma severity and total IgE level in asthmatic children. NLRP1 activators in humans are still unknown, however we hypothesized that individuals with gain-of-function SNPs in NLRP1 could be more prone in activating inflammasome in the presence of asthma-related cell stressors (i.e. ER stress or ROS), and this activation contribute to exacerbate inflammatory response and asthma development. Gain-of-function IL1A rs17561 resulted significantly associated with a reduced pulmonary capacity in asthmatic children. IL18 rs5744256 which lead to lower serum level of IL-18 appeared to be associated to a worse response to bronchodilators. Concluding, this work provides evidences about the contribution of inflammasome genetics in the development of paediatric asthma, both considering its inflammatory role in alveolar macrophages (i.e.: NLRP1) or its homeostatic role in lung epithelial cells (i.e.: IL1A, IL18)."]]
["agac_task3_91", ["Common and rare TBK1 variants in early-onset Alzheimer disease in a European cohort.\nTANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) loss-of-function (LoF) mutations are known to cause frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), often combined with memory deficits early in the disease course. We performed targeted resequencing of TBK1 in 1253 early onset Alzheimer's disease (EOAD) patients from 8 European countries to investigate whether pathogenic TBK1 mutations are enriched among patients with clinical diagnosis of EOAD. Variant frequencies were compared against 2117 origin-matched controls. We identified only 1 LoF mutation (p.Thr79del) in a patient clinically diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease and a positive family history of ALS. We did not observe enrichment of rare variants in EOAD patients compared to controls, nor of rare variants affecting NF\u03baB induction. Of 3 common coding variants, rs7486100 showed evidence of association (OR 1.46 [95% CI 1.13-1.9]; p-value 0.01). Homozygous carriers of the risk allele showed reduced expression of TBK1 (p-value 0.03). Our findings are not indicative of a significant role for TBK1 mutations in EOAD. The association between common variants in TBK1, disease risk and reduced TBK1 expression warrants follow-up in FTD/ALS cohorts.", "Common and rare TBK1 variants in early-onset Alzheimer disease in a European cohort.\nTANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) loss-of-function (LoF) mutations are known to cause frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), often combined with memory deficits early in the disease course. We performed targeted resequencing of TBK1 in 1253 early onset Alzheimer's disease (EOAD) patients from 8 European countries to investigate whether pathogenic TBK1 mutations are enriched among patients with clinical diagnosis of EOAD. Variant frequencies were compared against 2117 origin-matched controls. We identified only 1 LoF mutation (p.Thr79del) in a patient clinically diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease and a positive family history of ALS. We did not observe enrichment of rare variants in EOAD patients compared to controls, nor of rare variants affecting NF\u03baB induction. Of 3 common coding variants, rs7486100 showed evidence of association (OR 1.46 [95% CI 1.13-1.9]; p-value 0.01). Homozygous carriers of the risk allele showed reduced expression of TBK1 (p-value 0.03). Our findings are not indicative of a significant role for TBK1 mutations in EOAD. The association between common variants in TBK1, disease risk and reduced TBK1 expression warrants follow-up in FTD/ALS cohorts."]]
["agac_task3_92", ["Gain of function of TMEM16E/ANO5 scrambling activity caused by a mutation associated with gnathodiaphyseal dysplasia.\nMutations in the human TMEM16E (ANO5) gene are associated both with the bone disease gnathodiaphyseal dysplasia (GDD; OMIM: 166260) and muscle dystrophies (OMIM: 611307, 613319). However, the physiological function of TMEM16E has remained unclear. We show here that human TMEM16E, when overexpressed in mammalian cell lines, displayed partial plasma membrane localization and gave rise to phospholipid scrambling (PLS) as well as non-selective ionic currents with slow time-dependent activation at highly depolarized membrane potentials. While the activity of wild-type TMEM16E depended on elevated cytosolic Ca2+ levels, a mutant form carrying the GDD-causing T513I substitution showed PLS and large time-dependent ion currents even at low cytosolic Ca2+ concentrations. Contrarily, mutation of the homologous position in the Ca2+-activated Cl- channel TMEM16B paralog hardly affected its function. In summary, these data provide the first direct demonstration of Ca2+-dependent PLS activity for TMEM16E and suggest a gain-of-function phenotype related to a GDD mutation.", "Gain of function of TMEM16E/ANO5 scrambling activity caused by a mutation associated with gnathodiaphyseal dysplasia.\nMutations in the human TMEM16E (ANO5) gene are associated both with the bone disease gnathodiaphyseal dysplasia (GDD; OMIM: 166260) and muscle dystrophies (OMIM: 611307, 613319). However, the physiological function of TMEM16E has remained unclear. We show here that human TMEM16E, when overexpressed in mammalian cell lines, displayed partial plasma membrane localization and gave rise to phospholipid scrambling (PLS) as well as non-selective ionic currents with slow time-dependent activation at highly depolarized membrane potentials. While the activity of wild-type TMEM16E depended on elevated cytosolic Ca2+ levels, a mutant form carrying the GDD-causing T513I substitution showed PLS and large time-dependent ion currents even at low cytosolic Ca2+ concentrations. Contrarily, mutation of the homologous position in the Ca2+-activated Cl- channel TMEM16B paralog hardly affected its function. In summary, these data provide the first direct demonstration of Ca2+-dependent PLS activity for TMEM16E and suggest a gain-of-function phenotype related to a GDD mutation."]]
["agac_task3_93", ["Loss of function JAK1 mutations occur at high frequency in cancers with microsatellite instability and are suggestive of immune evasion.\nImmune evasion is a well-recognized hallmark of cancer and recent studies with immunotherapy agents have suggested that tumors with increased numbers of neoantigens elicit greater immune responses. We hypothesized that the immune system presents a common selective pressure on high mutation burden tumors and therefore immune evasion mutations would be enriched in high mutation burden tumors. The JAK family of kinases is required for the signaling of a host of immune modulators in tumor, stromal, and immune cells. Therefore, we analyzed alterations in this family for the hypothesized signature of an immune evasion mutation. Here, we searched a database of 61,704 unique solid tumors for alterations in the JAK family kinases (JAK1/2/3, TYK2). We used The Cancer Genome Atlas and Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia data to confirm and extend our findings by analyzing gene expression patterns. Recurrent frameshift mutations in JAK1 were associated with high mutation burden and microsatellite instability. These mutations occurred in multiple tumor types including endometrial, colorectal, stomach, and prostate carcinomas. Analyzing gene expression signatures in endometrial and stomach adenocarcinomas revealed that tumors with a JAK1 frameshift exhibited reduced expression of interferon response signatures and multiple anti-tumor immune signatures. Importantly, endometrial cancer cell lines exhibited similar gene expression changes that were expected to be tumor cell intrinsic (e.g. interferon response) but not those expected to be tumor cell extrinsic (e.g. NK cells). From these data, we derive two primary conclusions: 1) JAK1 frameshifts are loss of function alterations that represent a potential pan-cancer adaptation to immune responses against tumors with microsatellite instability; 2) The mechanism by which JAK1 loss of function contributes to tumor immune evasion is likely associated with loss of the JAK1-mediated interferon response.", "Loss of function JAK1 mutations occur at high frequency in cancers with microsatellite instability and are suggestive of immune evasion.\nImmune evasion is a well-recognized hallmark of cancer and recent studies with immunotherapy agents have suggested that tumors with increased numbers of neoantigens elicit greater immune responses. We hypothesized that the immune system presents a common selective pressure on high mutation burden tumors and therefore immune evasion mutations would be enriched in high mutation burden tumors. The JAK family of kinases is required for the signaling of a host of immune modulators in tumor, stromal, and immune cells. Therefore, we analyzed alterations in this family for the hypothesized signature of an immune evasion mutation. Here, we searched a database of 61,704 unique solid tumors for alterations in the JAK family kinases (JAK1/2/3, TYK2). We used The Cancer Genome Atlas and Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia data to confirm and extend our findings by analyzing gene expression patterns. Recurrent frameshift mutations in JAK1 were associated with high mutation burden and microsatellite instability. These mutations occurred in multiple tumor types including endometrial, colorectal, stomach, and prostate carcinomas. Analyzing gene expression signatures in endometrial and stomach adenocarcinomas revealed that tumors with a JAK1 frameshift exhibited reduced expression of interferon response signatures and multiple anti-tumor immune signatures. Importantly, endometrial cancer cell lines exhibited similar gene expression changes that were expected to be tumor cell intrinsic (e.g. interferon response) but not those expected to be tumor cell extrinsic (e.g. NK cells). From these data, we derive two primary conclusions: 1) JAK1 frameshifts are loss of function alterations that represent a potential pan-cancer adaptation to immune responses against tumors with microsatellite instability; 2) The mechanism by which JAK1 loss of function contributes to tumor immune evasion is likely associated with loss of the JAK1-mediated interferon response.", "Loss of function JAK1 mutations occur at high frequency in cancers with microsatellite instability and are suggestive of immune evasion.\nImmune evasion is a well-recognized hallmark of cancer and recent studies with immunotherapy agents have suggested that tumors with increased numbers of neoantigens elicit greater immune responses. We hypothesized that the immune system presents a common selective pressure on high mutation burden tumors and therefore immune evasion mutations would be enriched in high mutation burden tumors. The JAK family of kinases is required for the signaling of a host of immune modulators in tumor, stromal, and immune cells. Therefore, we analyzed alterations in this family for the hypothesized signature of an immune evasion mutation. Here, we searched a database of 61,704 unique solid tumors for alterations in the JAK family kinases (JAK1/2/3, TYK2). We used The Cancer Genome Atlas and Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia data to confirm and extend our findings by analyzing gene expression patterns. Recurrent frameshift mutations in JAK1 were associated with high mutation burden and microsatellite instability. These mutations occurred in multiple tumor types including endometrial, colorectal, stomach, and prostate carcinomas. Analyzing gene expression signatures in endometrial and stomach adenocarcinomas revealed that tumors with a JAK1 frameshift exhibited reduced expression of interferon response signatures and multiple anti-tumor immune signatures. Importantly, endometrial cancer cell lines exhibited similar gene expression changes that were expected to be tumor cell intrinsic (e.g. interferon response) but not those expected to be tumor cell extrinsic (e.g. NK cells). From these data, we derive two primary conclusions: 1) JAK1 frameshifts are loss of function alterations that represent a potential pan-cancer adaptation to immune responses against tumors with microsatellite instability; 2) The mechanism by which JAK1 loss of function contributes to tumor immune evasion is likely associated with loss of the JAK1-mediated interferon response.", "Loss of function JAK1 mutations occur at high frequency in cancers with microsatellite instability and are suggestive of immune evasion.\nImmune evasion is a well-recognized hallmark of cancer and recent studies with immunotherapy agents have suggested that tumors with increased numbers of neoantigens elicit greater immune responses. We hypothesized that the immune system presents a common selective pressure on high mutation burden tumors and therefore immune evasion mutations would be enriched in high mutation burden tumors. The JAK family of kinases is required for the signaling of a host of immune modulators in tumor, stromal, and immune cells. Therefore, we analyzed alterations in this family for the hypothesized signature of an immune evasion mutation. Here, we searched a database of 61,704 unique solid tumors for alterations in the JAK family kinases (JAK1/2/3, TYK2). We used The Cancer Genome Atlas and Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia data to confirm and extend our findings by analyzing gene expression patterns. Recurrent frameshift mutations in JAK1 were associated with high mutation burden and microsatellite instability. These mutations occurred in multiple tumor types including endometrial, colorectal, stomach, and prostate carcinomas. Analyzing gene expression signatures in endometrial and stomach adenocarcinomas revealed that tumors with a JAK1 frameshift exhibited reduced expression of interferon response signatures and multiple anti-tumor immune signatures. Importantly, endometrial cancer cell lines exhibited similar gene expression changes that were expected to be tumor cell intrinsic (e.g. interferon response) but not those expected to be tumor cell extrinsic (e.g. NK cells). From these data, we derive two primary conclusions: 1) JAK1 frameshifts are loss of function alterations that represent a potential pan-cancer adaptation to immune responses against tumors with microsatellite instability; 2) The mechanism by which JAK1 loss of function contributes to tumor immune evasion is likely associated with loss of the JAK1-mediated interferon response."]]
["agac_task3_94", ["Why are there hotspot mutations in the TP53 gene in human cancers?\nThe p53 gene contains homozygous mutations in ~50-60% of human cancers. About 90% of these mutations encode missense mutant proteins that span ~190 different codons localized in the DNA-binding domain of the gene and protein. These mutations produce a protein with a reduced capacity to bind to a specific DNA sequence that regulates the p53 transcriptional pathway. Eight of these mutations are localized in codons that account for ~28% of the total p53 mutations and these alleles appear to be selected for preferentially in human cancers of many tissue types. This article explores the question 'Why are there hotspot mutations in the p53 gene in human cancers?' Four possible reasons for this are considered; (1) the hotspot mutant alleles produce a protein that has a highly altered structure, (2) environmental mutagens produce allele-specific changes in the p53 gene, (3) these mutations arise at selected sites in the gene due to a specific DNA sequence, such as a methylated cytosine residue in a CpG dinucleotide, which has a higher mutation rate changing C to T nucleotides, (4) along with the observed change in mutant p53 proteins, which produce a loss of function (DNA binding and transcription), some mutant proteins have an allele-specific gain of function that promotes cancer. Evidence is presented that demonstrates the first three possibilities all contribute some property to this list of hotspot mutations. The fourth possibility remains to be tested."]]
["agac_task3_95", ["[FILAGGRIN GENE NULL-MUTATIONS AND ATOPIC DISEASES].\nNull-mutations which cause loss of function of the gene encoding filaggrin (FLG) have been strongly linked to the\ndevelopment of atopic disorders, predominantly atopic eczema/dermatitis syndrome (AEDS). Filaggrin plays a key role in\nepidermal barrier function by upholding epidermal structure and moisturization. Up to now, around 40 variants of FLG null-mutations\nhave been genotyped among different world populations. FLG null-mutations are present in up to 10% of the\nCaucasian population in Western Europe and North America, with R05X and 2282del4 as the most common null-mutations.\nEpidemiological studies conducted in Europe indicate a latitude dependent distribution of common FLG null-mutations\nwith a decreasing north-south gradient of R501X and 2282del4 mutation frequencies. FLG null-mutation carriers are prone\nto develop unspecific skin symptoms related to atopic and non-atopic skin disorders due to their defect of epidermal\nbarrier function, which allows greater skin penetration of various hazards. Epidemiological studies indicate an association\nof FLG null-mutations with AEDS, whereas results regarding an association of FLG null-mutations with sensitization to\ncommon inhalant allergens and development of rhinitis and asthma are incoherent. A study conducted in Croatia found a\nlow frequency of FLG null-mutations in general population (2.6%) and did not confirm FLG null-mutations as an etiological\nfactor for atopy and atopic disease in the studied population.", "Proteomic analysis of filaggrin deficiency identifies molecular signatures characteristic of atopic eczema.\nBACKGROUND: Atopic eczema (AE) is characterized by skin barrier and immune dysfunction. Null mutations in filaggrin (FLG), a key epidermal barrier protein, strongly predispose to AE; however, the precise role of FLG deficiency in AE pathogenesis remains incompletely understood.\nOBJECTIVES: We sought to identify global proteomic changes downstream of FLG deficiency in human epidermal living skin-equivalent (LSE) models and validate findings in skin of patients with AE.\nMETHODS: Differentially expressed proteins from paired control (nontargeting control short hairpin RNA [shNT]) and FLG knockdown (FLG knockdown short hairpin RNA [shFLG]) LSEs were identified by means of proteomic analysis (liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry) and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. Expression of key targets was validated in independent LSE samples (quantitative RT-PCR and Western blotting) and in normal and AE skin biopsy specimens (immunofluorescence).\nRESULTS: Proteomic analysis identified 17 (P\u00a0\u2264\u00a0.05) differentially\u00a0expressed proteins after FLG knockdown, including kallikrein-7 (KLK7; 2.2-fold), cyclophilin A\u00a0(PPIA; 0.9-fold), and cofilin-1 (CFL1, 1.3-fold). Differential protein expression was confirmed in shNT/shFLG LSEs; however, only KLK7 was transcriptionally dysregulated. Molecular pathways overrepresented after FLG knockdown included inflammation, protease activity, cell structure, and stress. Furthermore, KLK7 (1.8-fold) and PPIA (0.65-fold) proteins were differentially expressed in lesional biopsy specimens from patients with AE relative to normal skin.\nCONCLUSIONS: For the first time, we show that loss of FLG in the absence of inflammation is sufficient to alter the expression level of proteins relevant to the pathogenesis of AE. These include proteins regulating inflammatory, proteolytic, and cytoskeletal functions. We identify PPIA as a novel protein with levels that are decreased in clinically active AE skin and show that the characteristic upregulation of KLK7 expression in patients with AE occurs downstream of FLG loss. Importantly, we highlight disconnect between the epidermal proteome and transcriptome, emphasizing the utility of global proteomic studies."]]
["agac_task3_96", ["Polymorphism of glutathione S-transferase M1 and T1 genes and susceptibility to psoriasis disease: A study from North India.\nBACKGROUND: Increased oxidative stress and resulting inflammation has been emphasized as a factor in the pathogenesis of many diseases including psoriasis. Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) protect against oxidative stress, inflammation, and genotoxicity. Polymorphisms in the GST genes may lead to an imbalance in pro- and antioxidant systems resulting in the increased production of reactive oxygen species that could influence the pathogenesis of psoriasis.\nAIM: The aim of this study was to investigate the association between GSTs (GSTM1 and GSTT1) gene polymorphism in patients with chronic plaque psoriasis as a factor in the susceptibility and development of psoriasis.\nMATERIALS AND METHODS: We assessed 128 patients with psoriasis and 250 age- and sex-matched healthy controls. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood by the phenol chloroform method. The null GSTT1 and GSTM1 genotypes were identified by multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method.\nRESULTS: The null genotype of GSTM1 and GSTT1 was seen in 45.3% and 40.6% in psoriasis patients whereas in the controls it was 34.4% and 20.0%, respectively. A significant association was seen between the null alleles of the GSTT1 (OR = 2.74) and GSTM1 (OR = 1.58) alone or in combination with tobacco use (P < 0.001) and psoriasis risk. The presence of both null genotypes of GSTM1 and GSTT1 further increased the risk of psoriasis (OR = 3.52) when compared with the positive genotypes of GSTM1 and GSTT1.\nLIMITATIONS: A major limitation of this study was the small sample size. A large epidemiological study is necessary to confirm these findings.\nCONCLUSIONS: The null genotype of GSTT1 is a strong predisposing factor for psoriasis in North India."]]
["agac_task3_97", ["Polymorphism of glutathione S-transferase M1 and T1 genes and susceptibility to psoriasis disease: A study from North India.\nBACKGROUND: Increased oxidative stress and resulting inflammation has been emphasized as a factor in the pathogenesis of many diseases including psoriasis. Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) protect against oxidative stress, inflammation, and genotoxicity. Polymorphisms in the GST genes may lead to an imbalance in pro- and antioxidant systems resulting in the increased production of reactive oxygen species that could influence the pathogenesis of psoriasis.\nAIM: The aim of this study was to investigate the association between GSTs (GSTM1 and GSTT1) gene polymorphism in patients with chronic plaque psoriasis as a factor in the susceptibility and development of psoriasis.\nMATERIALS AND METHODS: We assessed 128 patients with psoriasis and 250 age- and sex-matched healthy controls. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood by the phenol chloroform method. The null GSTT1 and GSTM1 genotypes were identified by multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method.\nRESULTS: The null genotype of GSTM1 and GSTT1 was seen in 45.3% and 40.6% in psoriasis patients whereas in the controls it was 34.4% and 20.0%, respectively. A significant association was seen between the null alleles of the GSTT1 (OR = 2.74) and GSTM1 (OR = 1.58) alone or in combination with tobacco use (P < 0.001) and psoriasis risk. The presence of both null genotypes of GSTM1 and GSTT1 further increased the risk of psoriasis (OR = 3.52) when compared with the positive genotypes of GSTM1 and GSTT1.\nLIMITATIONS: A major limitation of this study was the small sample size. A large epidemiological study is necessary to confirm these findings.\nCONCLUSIONS: The null genotype of GSTT1 is a strong predisposing factor for psoriasis in North India."]]
["agac_task3_98", ["Gain-of-function HCN2 variants in genetic epilepsy.\nGenetic generalized epilepsy (GGE) is a common epilepsy syndrome that encompasses seizure disorders characterized by spike-and-wave discharges (SWDs). Pacemaker hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated channels (HCN) are considered integral to SWD genesis, making them an ideal gene candidate for GGE. We identified HCN2 missense variants from a large cohort of 585 GGE patients, recruited by the Epilepsy Phenome-Genome Project (EPGP), and performed functional analysis using two-electrode voltage clamp recordings from Xenopus oocytes. The p.S632W variant was identified in a patient with idiopathic photosensitive occipital epilepsy and segregated in the family. This variant was also independently identified in an unrelated patient with childhood absence seizures from a European cohort of 238 familial GGE cases. The p.V246M variant was identified in a patient with photo-sensitive GGE and his father diagnosed with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy. Functional studies revealed that both p.S632W and p.V246M had an identical functional impact including a depolarizing shift in the voltage dependence of activation that is consistent with a gain-of-function. In contrast, no biophysical changes resulted from the introduction of common population variants, p.E280K and p.A705T, and the p.R756C variant from EPGP that did not segregate with disease. Our data suggest that HCN2 variants can confer susceptibility to GGE via a gain-of-function mechanism."]]
["agac_task3_99", ["Parkinson's Disease-Associated LRRK2 Hyperactive Kinase Mutant Disrupts Synaptic Vesicle Trafficking in Ventral Midbrain Neurons.\nParkinson's disease (PD) is characterized pathologically by the selective loss of substantia nigra (SN) dopaminergic (DAergic) neurons. Recent evidence has suggested a role of LRRK2, linked to the most frequent familial PD, in regulating synaptic vesicle (SV) trafficking. However, the mechanism whereby LRRK2 mutants contribute to nigral vulnerability remains unclear. Here we show that the most common PD mutation LRRK2 G2019S impairs SV endocytosis in ventral midbrain (MB) neurons, including DA neurons, and the slowed endocytosis can be rescued by inhibition of LRRK2 kinase activity. A similar endocytic defect, however, was not observed in LRRK2 mutant neurons from the neocortex (hereafter, cortical neurons) or the hippocampus, suggesting a brain region-specific vulnerability to the G2019S mutation. Additionally, we found MB-specific impairment of SV endocytosis in neurons carrying heterozygous deletion of SYNJ1 (PARK20), a gene that is associated with recessive Parkinsonism. Combining SYNJ1+/- and LRRK2 G2019S does not exacerbate SV endocytosis but impairs sustained exocytosis in MB neurons and alters specific motor functions of 1-year-old male mice. Interestingly, we show that LRRK2 directly phosphorylates synaptojanin1 in vitro, resulting in the disruption of endophilin-synaptojanin1 interaction required for SV endocytosis. Our work suggests a merge of LRRK2 and SYNJ1 pathogenic pathways in deregulating SV trafficking in MB neurons as an underlying molecular mechanism of early PD pathogenesis.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Understanding midbrain dopaminergic (DAergic) neuron-selective vulnerability in PD is essential for the development of targeted therapeutics. We report, for the first time, a nerve terminal impairment in SV trafficking selectively in MB neurons but not cortical neurons caused by two PARK genes: LRRK2 (PARK8) and SYNJ1 (PARK20). We demonstrate that the enhanced kinase activity resulting from the most frequent G2019S mutation in LRRK2 is the key to this impairment. We provide evidence suggesting that LRRK2 G2019S and SYNJ1 loss of function share a similar pathogenic pathway in deregulating DAergic neuron SV endocytosis and that they play additive roles in facilitating each other's pathogenic functions in PD."]]
["agac_task3_100", ["Parkinson's Disease-Associated LRRK2 Hyperactive Kinase Mutant Disrupts Synaptic Vesicle Trafficking in Ventral Midbrain Neurons.\nParkinson's disease (PD) is characterized pathologically by the selective loss of substantia nigra (SN) dopaminergic (DAergic) neurons. Recent evidence has suggested a role of LRRK2, linked to the most frequent familial PD, in regulating synaptic vesicle (SV) trafficking. However, the mechanism whereby LRRK2 mutants contribute to nigral vulnerability remains unclear. Here we show that the most common PD mutation LRRK2 G2019S impairs SV endocytosis in ventral midbrain (MB) neurons, including DA neurons, and the slowed endocytosis can be rescued by inhibition of LRRK2 kinase activity. A similar endocytic defect, however, was not observed in LRRK2 mutant neurons from the neocortex (hereafter, cortical neurons) or the hippocampus, suggesting a brain region-specific vulnerability to the G2019S mutation. Additionally, we found MB-specific impairment of SV endocytosis in neurons carrying heterozygous deletion of SYNJ1 (PARK20), a gene that is associated with recessive Parkinsonism. Combining SYNJ1+/- and LRRK2 G2019S does not exacerbate SV endocytosis but impairs sustained exocytosis in MB neurons and alters specific motor functions of 1-year-old male mice. Interestingly, we show that LRRK2 directly phosphorylates synaptojanin1 in vitro, resulting in the disruption of endophilin-synaptojanin1 interaction required for SV endocytosis. Our work suggests a merge of LRRK2 and SYNJ1 pathogenic pathways in deregulating SV trafficking in MB neurons as an underlying molecular mechanism of early PD pathogenesis.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Understanding midbrain dopaminergic (DAergic) neuron-selective vulnerability in PD is essential for the development of targeted therapeutics. We report, for the first time, a nerve terminal impairment in SV trafficking selectively in MB neurons but not cortical neurons caused by two PARK genes: LRRK2 (PARK8) and SYNJ1 (PARK20). We demonstrate that the enhanced kinase activity resulting from the most frequent G2019S mutation in LRRK2 is the key to this impairment. We provide evidence suggesting that LRRK2 G2019S and SYNJ1 loss of function share a similar pathogenic pathway in deregulating DAergic neuron SV endocytosis and that they play additive roles in facilitating each other's pathogenic functions in PD."]]
["agac_task3_101", ["Parkin absence accelerates microtubule aging in dopaminergic neurons.\nLoss-of-function caused by mutations in the parkin gene (PARK2) lead to early-onset familial Parkinson's disease. Recently, mechanistic studies proved the ability of parkin in regulating mitochondria homeostasis and microtubule (MT) stability. Looking at these systems during aging of PARK2 knockout mice, we found that loss of parkin induced an accelerated (over)acetylation of MT system both in dopaminergic neuron cell bodies and fibers, localized in the substantia nigra and corpus striatum, respectively. Interestingly, in PARK2 knockout mice, changes of MT stability preceded the alteration of mitochondria transport. Moreover, in-cell experiments confirmed that loss of parkin affects mitochondria mobility and showed that this defect depends on MT system as it is rescued by paclitaxel, a well-known MT-targeted agent. Furthermore, both in PC12 neuronal cells and in patients' induced pluripotent stem cell-derived midbrain neurons, we observed that parkin deficiencies cause the fragmentation of stable MTs. Therefore, we suggest that parkin acts as a regulator of MT system during neuronal aging, and we endorse the hypothesis that MT dysfunction may be crucial in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease."]]
["agac_task3_102", ["The Gain-of-Function Integrin \u03b23 Pro33 Variant Alters the Serotonin System in the Mouse Brain.\nEngagement of integrins by the extracellular matrix initiates signaling cascades that drive a variety of cellular functions, including neuronal migration and axonal pathfinding in the brain. Multiple lines of evidence link the ITGB3 gene encoding the integrin \u03b23 subunit with the serotonin (5-HT) system, likely via its modulation of the 5-HT transporter (SERT). The ITGB3 coding polymorphism Leu33Pro (rs5918, PlA2) produces hyperactive \u03b1v\u03b23 receptors that influence whole-blood 5-HT levels and may influence the risk for autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Using a phenome-wide scan of psychiatric diagnoses, we found significant, male-specific associations between the Pro33 allele and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder and ASDs. Here, we used knock-in (KI) mice expressing an Itgb3 variant that phenocopies the human Pro33 variant to elucidate the consequences of constitutively enhanced \u03b1v\u03b23 signaling to the 5-HT system in the brain. KI mice displayed deficits in multiple behaviors, including anxiety, repetitive, and social behaviors. Anatomical studies revealed a significant decrease in 5-HT synapses in the midbrain, accompanied by decreases in SERT activity and reduced localization of SERTs to integrin adhesion complexes in synapses of KI mice. Inhibition of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) rescued SERT function in synapses of KI mice, demonstrating that constitutive active FAK signaling downstream of the Pro32Pro33 integrin \u03b1v\u03b23 suppresses SERT activity. Our studies identify a complex regulation of 5-HT homeostasis and behaviors by integrin \u03b1v\u03b23, revealing an important role for integrins in modulating risk for neuropsychiatric disorders.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT The integrin \u03b23 Leu33Pro coding polymorphism has been associated with autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) within a subgroup of patients with elevated blood 5-HT levels, linking integrin \u03b23, 5-HT, and ASD risk. We capitalized on these interactions to demonstrate that the Pro33 coding variation in the murine integrin \u03b23 recapitulates the sex-dependent neurochemical and behavioral attributes of ASD. Using state-of-the-art techniques, we show that presynaptic 5-HT function is altered in these mice, and that the localization of 5-HT transporters to specific compartments within the synapse, disrupted by the integrin \u03b23 Pro33 mutation, is critical for appropriate reuptake of 5-HT. Our studies provide fundamental insight into the genetic network regulating 5-HT neurotransmission in the CNS that is also associated with ASD risk."]]
["agac_task3_103", ["Differential regulation of two FLNA transcripts explains some of the phenotypic heterogeneity in the loss-of-function filaminopathies.\nLoss-of-function mutations in the X-linked gene FLNA can lead to abnormal neuronal migration, vascular and cardiac defects, and congenital intestinal pseudo-obstruction (CIPO), the latter characterized by anomalous intestinal smooth muscle layering. Survival in male hemizygotes for such mutations is dependent on retention of residual FLNA function but it is unclear why a subgroup of males with mutations in the 5' end of the gene can present with CIPO alone. Here, we demonstrate evidence for the presence of two FLNA isoforms differing by 28 residues at the N-terminus initiated at ATG+1 and ATG+82 . A male with CIPO (c.18_19del) exclusively expressed FLNA ATG+82 , implicating the longer protein isoform (ATG+1 ) in smooth muscle development. In contrast, mutations leading to reduction of both isoforms are associated with compound phenotypes affecting the brain, heart, and intestine. RNA-seq data revealed three distinct transcription start sites, two of which produce a protein isoform utilizing ATG+1 while the third utilizes ATG+82 . Transcripts sponsoring translational initiation at ATG+1 predominate in intestinal smooth muscle, and are more abundant compared with the level measured in fibroblasts. Together these observations describe a new mechanism of tissue-specific regulation of FLNA that could reflect the differing mechanical requirements of these cell types during development."]]
["agac_task3_104", ["Homozygous indel mutation in CDH11 as the probable cause of Elsahy-Waters syndrome.\nTwo sisters from a consanguineous couple were seen in genetics department for facial dysmorphic features and glaucoma. They both had broad foreheads, hypertelorism, megalocorneas, thick eyebrows with synophrys, flat malar regions, broad and bulbous noses, and mild prognathism. Both had glaucoma, younger one also had cataracts and phthisis bulbi. Other findings included bilateral partial cutaneous syndactyly of 2nd and 3rd fingers, history of impacted teeth with dentigerous cyst in the elder one, and intellectual disability (mild and borderline). The sisters were considered to have Elsahy-Waters syndrome. In order to elucidate the underlying molecular cause, sisters and their healthy parents were genotyped by SNP arrays, followed by homozygosity mapping. Homozygous regions were further analyzed by exome sequencing in one affected individual. A homozygous indel variant segregating with the condition was detected in CDH11 (c.1116_1117delinsGATCATCAG, p.(Ile372MetfsTer9)), which was then validated by using Sanger sequencing. CDH11 encodes cadherin 11 (osteo-cadherin) that regulates cell-cell adhesion, cell polarization and migration, as well as osteogenic differentiation. Further experiments revealed that CDH11 expression was decreased in patient-derived fibroblasts as compared to the heterozygous parent and another healthy donor. Immunostaining showed absence of the protein expression in patient fibroblasts. In addition, cell proliferation rate was slow and osteogenic differentiation potential was delayed. We consider that this study reveals loss-of-function mutations in CDH11 as a probable cause of this phenotype. Next generation sequencing in further patients would both prove this gene as causative, and finely delineate this clinical spectrum further contributing in identification of other possibly involved gene(s)."]]
["agac_task3_105", ["Three Cases of KCNT1 Mutations: Malignant Migrating Partial Seizures in Infancy with Massive Systemic to Pulmonary Collateral Arteries.\nKCNT1 mutations are gain-of-function mutations in potassium channels resulting in severe infantile epilepsy. Herein we describe 3 infants with malignant migrating partial seizures with KCNT1 mutations accompanied by massive systemic to pulmonary collateral arteries with life-threatening hemoptysis and heart failure."]]
["agac_task3_106", ["Zebrafish cdc6 hypomorphic mutation causes Meier-Gorlin syndrome-like phenotype.\nCell Division Cycle 6 (Cdc6) is a component of pre-replicative complex (preRC) forming on DNA replication origins in eukaryotes. Recessive mutations in ORC1, ORC4, ORC6, CDT1 or CDC6 of the preRC in human cause Meier-Gorlin syndrome (MGS) that is characterized by impaired post-natal growth, short stature and microcephaly. However, vertebrate models of MGS have not been reported. Through N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea mutagenesis and Cas9 knockout, we generate several cdc6 mutant lines in zebrafish. Loss-of-function mutations of cdc6, as manifested by cdc6tsu4305 and cdc6tsu7cd mutants, lead to embryonic lethality due to cell cycle arrest at the S phase and extensive apoptosis. Embryos homozygous for a cdc6 hypomorphic mutation, cdc6tsu21cd, develop normally during embryogenesis. Later on, compared with their wild-type (WT) siblings, cdc6tsu21cd mutant fish show growth retardation, and their body weight and length in adulthood are greatly reduced, which resemble human MGS. Surprisingly, cdc6tsu21cd mutant fish become males with a short life and fail to mate with WT females, suggesting defective reproduction. Overexpression of Cdc6 mutant forms, which mimic human CDC6(T323R) mutation found in a MGS patient, in zebrafish cdc6tsu4305 mutant embryos partially represses cell death phenotype, suggesting that the human CDC6(T323R) mutation is a hypomorph. cdc6tsu21cd mutant fish will be useful to detect more tissue defects and develop medical treatment strategies for MGS patients."]]
["agac_task3_107", ["Tacrolimus rescues the signaling and gene expression signature of endothelial ALK1 loss-of-function and improves HHT vascular pathology.\nHereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) is a highly debilitating and life-threatening genetic vascular disorder arising from endothelial cell (EC) proliferation and hypervascularization, for which no cure exists. Because HHT is caused by loss-of-function mutations in bone morphogenetic protein 9 (BMP9)-ALK1-Smad1/5/8 signaling, interventions aimed at activating this pathway are of therapeutic value. We interrogated the whole-transcriptome in human umbilical vein ECs (HUVECs) and found that ALK1 signaling inhibition was associated with a specific pro-angiogenic gene expression signature, which included a significant elevation of DLL4 expression. By screening the NIH clinical collections of FDA-approved drugs, we identified tacrolimus (FK-506) as the most potent activator of ALK1 signaling in BMP9-challenged C2C12 reporter cells. In HUVECs, tacrolimus activated Smad1/5/8 and opposed the pro-angiogenic gene expression signature associated with ALK1 loss-of-function, by notably reducing Dll4 expression. In these cells, tacrolimus also inhibited Akt and p38 stimulation by vascular endothelial growth factor, a major driver of angiogenesis. In the BMP9/10-immunodepleted postnatal retina-a mouse model of HHT vascular pathology-tacrolimus activated endothelial Smad1/5/8 and prevented the Dll4 overexpression and hypervascularization associated with this model. Finally, tacrolimus stimulated Smad1/5/8 signaling in C2C12 cells expressing BMP9-unresponsive ALK1 HHT mutants and in HHT patient blood outgrowth ECs. Tacrolimus repurposing has therefore therapeutic potential in HHT."]]
["agac_task3_108", ["Highlighting Interleukin-36 Signalling in Plaque Psoriasis and Pustular Psoriasis.\nPlaque psoriasis and pustular psoriasis are overlapping, but distinct, disorders. The therapeutic response to biologics supports the pivotal role of the tumour necrosis alpha (TNF-?)/ interleukin (IL)-23/IL-17/IL-22 axis in the pathogenesis of these disorders. Recently, functional activation of the IL-36 receptor (IL-36R) was discovered to be another driving force in the pathogenesis of psoriasis. This was first highlighted by the discovery that a loss-of-function mutation of the IL-36R antagonist (IL-36Ra) causes pustular psoriasis. Although the TNF-?/IL-23/IL-17/IL-22 axis and the functional activation of IL-36R are fundamentally involved in plaque psoriasis and pustular psoriasis, respectively, the 2 pathways are closely related and mutually reinforced, resulting in full-blown clinical manifestations. This review summarizes current topics on how IL-36 agonists (IL-36?, IL-36?, IL-36?) signal IL-36R, the pathological expression of IL-36 agonists and IL-36Ra in plaque and pustular psoriatic lesions, and the cross-talk between the TNF-?/IL-23/IL-17/IL-22 axis and the functional activation of IL-36R in the epidermal milieu."]]
["agac_task3_109", ["Clcn7F318L/+ as a new mouse model of Albers-Sch\u00f6nberg disease.\nDominant negative mutations in CLCN7, which encodes a homodimeric chloride channel needed for matrix acidification by osteoclasts, cause Albers-Sch\u00f6nberg disease (also known as autosomal dominant osteopetrosis type 2). More than 25 different CLCN7 mutations have been identified in patients affected with Albers-Sch\u00f6nberg disease, but only one mutation (Clcn7G213R) has been introduced in mice to create an animal model of this disease. Here we describe a mouse with a different osteopetrosis-causing mutation (Clcn7F318L). Compared to Clcn7+/+ mice, 12-week-old Clcn7F318L/+ mice have significantly increased trabecular bone volume, consistent with Clcn7F318L acting as a dominant negative mutation. Clcn7F318L/F318L and Clcn7F318L/G213R mice die by 1month of age and resemble Clcn7 knockout mice, which indicate that p.F318L mutant protein is non-functional and p.F318L and p.G213R mutant proteins do not complement one another. Since it has been reported that treatment with interferon gamma (IFN-G) improves bone properties in Clcn7G213R/+ mice, we treated Clcn7F318L/+ mice with IFN-G and observed a decrease in osteoclast number and mineral apposition rate, but no overall improvement in bone properties. Our results suggest that the benefits of IFN-G therapy in patients with Albers-Sch\u00f6nberg disease may be mutation-specific."]]
["agac_task3_110", ["Loss-of-function variants in NFIA provide further support that NFIA is a critical gene in 1p32-p31 deletion syndrome: A four patient series.\nThe association between 1p32-p31 contiguous gene deletions and a distinct phenotype that includes anomalies of the corpus callosum, ventriculomegaly, developmental delay, seizures, and dysmorphic features has been long recognized and described. Recently, the observation of overlapping phenotypes in patients with chromosome translocations that disrupt NFIA (Nuclear factor I/A), a gene within this deleted region, and NFIA intragenic deletions has led to the hypothesis that NFIA is a critical gene within this region. The wide application and increasing accessibility of whole exome sequencing (WES) has helped identify new cases to support this hypothesis. Here, we describe four patients with loss-of-function variants in the NFIA gene identified through WES. The clinical presentation of these patients significantly overlaps with the phenotype described in previously reported cases of 1p32-p31 deletion syndrome, NFIA gene disruptions and intragenic NFIA deletions. Our cohort includes a mother and daughter as well as an unrelated individual who share the same nonsense variant (c.205C>T, p.Arg69Ter; NM_001145512.1). We also report a patient with a frameshift NFIA variant (c.159_160dupCC, p.Gln54ProfsTer49). We have compared published cases of 1p32-p31 microdeletion syndrome, translocations resulting in NFIA gene disruption, intragenic deletions, and loss-of-function mutations (including our four patients) to reveal that abnormalities of the corpus callosum, ventriculomegaly/hydrocephalus, macrocephaly, Chiari I malformation, dysmorphic features, developmental delay, hypotonia, and urinary tract defects are common findings. The consistent overlap in clinical presentation provides further evidence of the critical role of NFIA haploinsufficiency in the development of the 1p32-p31 microdeletion syndrome phenotype."]]
["agac_task3_111", ["N1366S mutation of human skeletal muscle sodium channel causes paramyotonia congenita.\nKEY POINTS: Paramyotonia congenita is a hereditary channelopathy caused by missense mutations in the SCN4A gene, which encodes the \u03b1 subunit of the human skeletal muscle voltage-gated sodium channel NaV1.4. Affected individuals suffered from myotonia and paralysis of muscles, which were aggravated by exposure to cold. We report a three-generation Chinese family with patients presenting paramyotonia congenita and identify a novel N1366S mutation of NaV1.4. Whole-cell electrophysiological recordings of the N1366S channel reveal a gain-of-function change of gating in response to cold. Modelling and molecular dynamic simulation data suggest that an arginine-to-serine substitution at position 1366 increases the distance from N1366 to R1454 and disrupts the hydrogen bond formed between them at low temperature. We demonstrate that N1366S is a disease-causing mutation and that the temperature-sensitive alteration of N1366S channel activity may be responsible for the pronounced paramyotonia congenita symptoms of these patients.\nABSTRACT: Paramyotonia congenita is an autosomal dominant skeletal muscle channelopathy caused by missense mutations in SCN4A, the gene encoding the \u03b1 subunit of the human skeletal muscle voltage-gated sodium channel NaV1.4. We report a three-generation family in which six members present clinical symptoms of paramyotonia congenita characterized by a marked worsening of myotonia by cold and by the presence of clear episodes of paralysis. We identified a novel mutation in SCN4A (Asn1366Ser, N1366S) in all patients in the family but not in healthy relatives or in 500 normal control subjects. Functional analysis of the channel protein expressed in HEK293 cells by whole-cell patch clamp recording revealed that the N1366S mutation led to significant alterations in the gating process of the NaV1.4 channel. The N1366S mutant displayed a cold-induced hyperpolarizing shift in the voltage dependence of activation and a depolarizing shift in fast inactivation, as well as a reduced rate of fast inactivation and accelerated recovery from fast inactivation. In addition, homology modelling and molecular dynamic simulation of N1366S and wild-type NaV1.4 channels indicated that the arginine-to-serine substitution disrupted the hydrogen bond formed between N1366 and R1454. Together, our results suggest that N1366S is a gain-of-function mutation of NaV1.4 at low temperature and the mutation may be responsible for the clinical symptoms of paramyotonia congenita in the affected family and constitute a basis for studies into its pathogenesis."]]
["agac_task3_112", ["Homozygous KIDINS220 loss-of-function variants in fetuses with cerebral ventriculomegaly and limb contractures.\nHeterozygous mutations in KIDINS220 were recently suggested a cause of spastic paraplegia, intellectual disability, nystagmus and obesity. All patients carried terminal nonsense de novo mutations that seemed to escape nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. The mechanism for pathogenicity is yet unexplained, as it seems that heterozygous loss-of-function variants of KIDINS220 are generally well tolerated. We present a consanguineous couple who experienced four pregnancy terminations due to repeated findings in the fetuses comprising enlarged cerebral ventricles and limb contractures. Exome sequencing in two of the aborted fetuses revealed a shared homozygous frameshift variant in exon 24 in KIDINS220. Sanger sequencing of the variant in available family members showed complete segregation with the affection status, resulting in a LOD score of 2.5 under an autozygous inheritance model. mRNA studies revealed destruction of the original splice site, resulting in an out-of-frame transcript and introduction of a premature termination codon in exon 25. Premature termination codons in this position are likely to cause activation of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay and result in complete absence of KIDINS220 protein in individuals homozygous for the variant. The phenotype of the presented fetuses overlaps with findings in functional studies of knockout Kidins220 mice embryos that are non-viable with enlarged cerebral ventricles. The human fetuses also exhibit several similarities to the milder phenotype described in patients with heterozygous KIDINS220 mutations. We hence propose that the identified homozygous loss-of-function variant in KIDINS220 causes the phenotype in the presented fetuses, and that this represents a hitherto undescribed severe autosomal recessive neurodevelopmental disorder.", "Homozygous KIDINS220 loss-of-function variants in fetuses with cerebral ventriculomegaly and limb contractures.\nHeterozygous mutations in KIDINS220 were recently suggested a cause of spastic paraplegia, intellectual disability, nystagmus and obesity. All patients carried terminal nonsense de novo mutations that seemed to escape nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. The mechanism for pathogenicity is yet unexplained, as it seems that heterozygous loss-of-function variants of KIDINS220 are generally well tolerated. We present a consanguineous couple who experienced four pregnancy terminations due to repeated findings in the fetuses comprising enlarged cerebral ventricles and limb contractures. Exome sequencing in two of the aborted fetuses revealed a shared homozygous frameshift variant in exon 24 in KIDINS220. Sanger sequencing of the variant in available family members showed complete segregation with the affection status, resulting in a LOD score of 2.5 under an autozygous inheritance model. mRNA studies revealed destruction of the original splice site, resulting in an out-of-frame transcript and introduction of a premature termination codon in exon 25. Premature termination codons in this position are likely to cause activation of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay and result in complete absence of KIDINS220 protein in individuals homozygous for the variant. The phenotype of the presented fetuses overlaps with findings in functional studies of knockout Kidins220 mice embryos that are non-viable with enlarged cerebral ventricles. The human fetuses also exhibit several similarities to the milder phenotype described in patients with heterozygous KIDINS220 mutations. We hence propose that the identified homozygous loss-of-function variant in KIDINS220 causes the phenotype in the presented fetuses, and that this represents a hitherto undescribed severe autosomal recessive neurodevelopmental disorder.", "Homozygous KIDINS220 loss-of-function variants in fetuses with cerebral ventriculomegaly and limb contractures.\nHeterozygous mutations in KIDINS220 were recently suggested a cause of spastic paraplegia, intellectual disability, nystagmus and obesity. All patients carried terminal nonsense de novo mutations that seemed to escape nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. The mechanism for pathogenicity is yet unexplained, as it seems that heterozygous loss-of-function variants of KIDINS220 are generally well tolerated. We present a consanguineous couple who experienced four pregnancy terminations due to repeated findings in the fetuses comprising enlarged cerebral ventricles and limb contractures. Exome sequencing in two of the aborted fetuses revealed a shared homozygous frameshift variant in exon 24 in KIDINS220. Sanger sequencing of the variant in available family members showed complete segregation with the affection status, resulting in a LOD score of 2.5 under an autozygous inheritance model. mRNA studies revealed destruction of the original splice site, resulting in an out-of-frame transcript and introduction of a premature termination codon in exon 25. Premature termination codons in this position are likely to cause activation of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay and result in complete absence of KIDINS220 protein in individuals homozygous for the variant. The phenotype of the presented fetuses overlaps with findings in functional studies of knockout Kidins220 mice embryos that are non-viable with enlarged cerebral ventricles. The human fetuses also exhibit several similarities to the milder phenotype described in patients with heterozygous KIDINS220 mutations. We hence propose that the identified homozygous loss-of-function variant in KIDINS220 causes the phenotype in the presented fetuses, and that this represents a hitherto undescribed severe autosomal recessive neurodevelopmental disorder.", "Homozygous KIDINS220 loss-of-function variants in fetuses with cerebral ventriculomegaly and limb contractures.\nHeterozygous mutations in KIDINS220 were recently suggested a cause of spastic paraplegia, intellectual disability, nystagmus and obesity. All patients carried terminal nonsense de novo mutations that seemed to escape nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. The mechanism for pathogenicity is yet unexplained, as it seems that heterozygous loss-of-function variants of KIDINS220 are generally well tolerated. We present a consanguineous couple who experienced four pregnancy terminations due to repeated findings in the fetuses comprising enlarged cerebral ventricles and limb contractures. Exome sequencing in two of the aborted fetuses revealed a shared homozygous frameshift variant in exon 24 in KIDINS220. Sanger sequencing of the variant in available family members showed complete segregation with the affection status, resulting in a LOD score of 2.5 under an autozygous inheritance model. mRNA studies revealed destruction of the original splice site, resulting in an out-of-frame transcript and introduction of a premature termination codon in exon 25. Premature termination codons in this position are likely to cause activation of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay and result in complete absence of KIDINS220 protein in individuals homozygous for the variant. The phenotype of the presented fetuses overlaps with findings in functional studies of knockout Kidins220 mice embryos that are non-viable with enlarged cerebral ventricles. The human fetuses also exhibit several similarities to the milder phenotype described in patients with heterozygous KIDINS220 mutations. We hence propose that the identified homozygous loss-of-function variant in KIDINS220 causes the phenotype in the presented fetuses, and that this represents a hitherto undescribed severe autosomal recessive neurodevelopmental disorder."]]
["agac_task3_113", ["Gain-of-function mutation in PTPN11 in histiocytic sarcomas of Bernese Mountain Dogs.\nHistiocytic sarcoma (HS) is an aggressive malignant neoplasm of dendritic cell origin that is common in certain breeds of dogs. High prevalence of fatal, disseminated HS has been described in Bernese Mountain Dogs (BMDs). Support for genetic predisposition to develop HS has been presented in several studies, but to date, causative genetic events have not been reported. In addition, no driver mutations have been identified in tumours. Recently, E76K gain-of-function mutation in SHP2 encoded by the PTPN11 gene has been described in human histiocytic malignancies. In our study, we identified the PTPN11E76K in HS of BMDs. Amplification of exon 3 of the PTPN11 gene followed by Sanger sequencing was used to detect the mutation and estimate the prevalence in HS from 30 BMDs, 13 Golden Retrievers and 10 other dog breeds. The overall prevalence of PTPN11E76K in HS of BMDs was 36.67% compared with 8.69% in other breeds. No mutation was identified in normal tissues from 10 BMDs with HS that carried the mutation and 12 control dogs with no neoplastic disease, including 6 BMDs. Increased immunoreactivity for AKT, phosphorylated ERK1/2 and phosphorylated AKT in a small subset of BMDs with PTPN11E76K suggests that a gain-of-function might be mediated by the ERK and AKT pathways. These data suggest PTPN11E76K as an important driver mutation of HS in BMDs. This information may not only aid in unravelling the tumourigenic events associated with HS in BMDs, but also help in identifying more promising therapeutic strategies."]]
["agac_task3_114", ["Altered Cav1.2 function in the Timothy syndrome mouse model produces ascending serotonergic abnormalities.\nPolymorphism in the gene CACNA1C, encoding the pore-forming subunit of Cav1.2 L-type calcium channels, has one of the strongest genetic linkages to schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and major depressive disorder: psychopathologies in which serotonin signaling has been implicated. Additionally, a gain-of-function mutation in CACNA1C is responsible for the neurodevelopmental disorder Timothy syndrome that presents with prominent behavioral features on the autism spectrum. Given an emerging role for serotonin in the etiology of autism spectrum disorders (ASD), we investigate the relationship between Cav1.2 and the ascending serotonin system in the Timothy syndrome type 2 (TS2-neo) mouse, which displays behavioral features consistent with the core triad of ASD. We find that TS2-neo mice exhibit enhanced serotonin tissue content and axon innervation of the dorsal striatum, as well as decreased serotonin turnover in the amygdala. These regionally specific alterations are accompanied by an enhanced active coping response during acute stress (forced swim), serotonin neuron Fos activity in the caudal dorsal raphe, and serotonin type 1A receptor-dependent feedback inhibition of the rostral dorsal raphe nuclei. Collectively, these results suggest that the global gain-of-function Cav1.2 mutation associated with Timothy syndrome has pleiotropic effects on the ascending serotonin system including neuroanatomical changes, regional differences in forebrain serotonin metabolism and feedback regulatory control mechanisms within the dorsal raphe. Altered activity of the ascending serotonin system continues to emerge as a common neural signature across several ASD mouse models, and the capacity for Cav1.2 L-type calcium channels to impact both serotonin structure and function has important implications for several neuropsychiatric conditions."]]
["agac_task3_115", ["De novo SETD5 loss-of-function variant as a cause for intellectual disability in a 10-year old boy with an aberrant blind ending bronchus.\nAlthough rare, 3p microdeletion cases have been well described in the clinical literature. The clinical phenotype includes; intellectual disability (ID), growth retardation, facial dysmorphism, and cardiac malformations. Advances in chromosome microarray (CMA) testing narrowed the 3p25 critical region to a 124\u2009kb region, and recent Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) studies have suggested that the SETD5 gene contributes significantly to the 3p25 phenotype. Loss-of-Function (LoF) variants in SETD5 are now considered a likely cause of ID. We report here a patient with a frameshift LoF variant in exon 12 of SETD5. This patient has features overlapping with other patients described with LoF SETD5 variants to include; similar facial morphology, feeding difficulties, ID, behavioral abnormalities and leg length discrepancy. In addition, he presents with an aberrant blind ending bronchus. This report adds to publications describing intragenic mutations in SETD5 and supports the assertion that de novo LoF mutations in SETD5 present with an overlapping but distinct phenotype in comparison with 3p25 microdeletion syndromes."]]
["agac_task3_116", ["The Impact of Heterozygous KCNK3 Mutations Associated With Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension on Channel Function and Pharmacological Recovery.\nBACKGROUND: Heterozygous loss of function mutations in the KCNK3 gene cause hereditary pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). KCNK3 encodes an acid-sensitive potassium channel, which contributes to the resting potential of human pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells. KCNK3 is widely expressed in the body, and dimerizes with other KCNK3 subunits, or the closely related, acid-sensitive KCNK9 channel.\nMETHODS AND RESULTS: We engineered homomeric and heterodimeric mutant and nonmutant KCNK3 channels associated with PAH. Using whole-cell patch-clamp electrophysiology in human pulmonary artery smooth muscle and COS7 cell lines, we determined that homomeric and heterodimeric mutant channels in heterozygous KCNK3 conditions lead to mutation-specific severity of channel dysfunction. Both wildtype and mutant KCNK3 channels were activated by ONO-RS-082 (10\u00a0\u03bcmol/L), causing cell hyperpolarization. We observed robust gene expression of KCNK3 in healthy and familial PAH patient lungs, but no quantifiable expression of KCNK9, and demonstrated in functional studies that KCNK9 minimizes the impact of select KCNK3 mutations when the 2 channel subunits co-assemble.\nCONCLUSIONS: Heterozygous KCNK3 mutations in PAH lead to variable loss of channel function via distinct mechanisms. Homomeric and heterodimeric mutant KCNK3 channels represent novel therapeutic substrates in PAH. Pharmacological and pH-dependent activation of wildtype and mutant KCNK3 channels in pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells leads to membrane hyperpolarization. Co-assembly of KCNK3 with KCNK9 subunits may provide protection against KCNK3 loss of function in tissues where both KCNK9 and KCNK3 are expressed, contributing to the lung-specific phenotype observed clinically in patients with PAH because of KCNK3 mutations."]]
["agac_task3_117", ["The apolipoprotein C-III (Gln38Lys) variant associated with human hypertriglyceridemia is a gain-of-function mutation.\nRecent cell culture and animal studies have suggested that expression of human apo C-III in the liver has a profound impact on the triacylglycerol (TAG)-rich VLDL1 production under lipid-rich conditions. The apoC-III Gln38Lys variant was identified in subjects of Mexican origin with moderate hypertriglyceridemia. We postulated that Gln38Lys (C3QK), being a gain-of-function mutation, promotes hepatic VLDL1 assembly/secretion. To test this hypothesis, we expressed C3QK in McA-RH7777 cells and apoc3-null mice to contrast its effect with WT apoC-III (C3WT). In both model systems, C3QK expression increased the secretion of VLDL1-TAG (by 230%) under lipid-rich conditions. Metabolic labeling experiments with C3QK cells showed an increase in de novo lipogenesis (DNL). Fasting plasma concentration of TAG, cholesterol, cholesteryl ester, and FA were increased in C3QK mice as compared with C3WT mice. Liver of C3QK mice also displayed an increase in DNL and expression of lipogenic genes as compared with that in C3WT mice. These results suggest that C3QK variant is a gain-of-function mutation that can stimulate VLDL1 production, through enhanced DNL."]]
["agac_task3_118", ["Loss-of-Function GRHL3 Variants Detected in African Patients with Isolated Cleft Palate.\nIn contrast to the progress that has been made toward understanding the genetic etiology of cleft lip with or without cleft palate, relatively little is known about the genetic etiology for cleft palate only (CPO). A common coding variant of grainyhead like transcription factor 3 ( GRHL3) was recently shown to be associated with risk for CPO in Europeans. Mutations in this gene were also reported in families with Van der Woude syndrome. To identify rare mutations in GRHL3 that might explain the missing heritability for CPO, we sequenced GRHL3 in cases of CPO from Africa. We recruited participants from Ghana, Ethiopia, and Nigeria. This cohort included case-parent trios, cases and other family members, as well as controls. We sequenced exons of this gene in DNA from a total of 134 nonsyndromic cases. When possible, we sequenced them in parents to identify de novo mutations. Five novel mutations were identified: 2 missense (c.497C>A; p.Pro166His and c.1229A>G; p.Asp410Gly), 1 splice site (c.1282A>C p.Ser428Arg), 1 frameshift (c.470delC; p.Gly158Alafster55), and 1 nonsense (c.1677C>A; p.Tyr559Ter). These mutations were absent from 270 sequenced controls and from all public exome and whole genome databases, including the 1000 Genomes database (which includes data from Africa). However, 4 of the 5 mutations were present in unaffected mothers, indicating that their penetrance is incomplete. Interestingly, 1 mutation damaged a predicted sumoylation site, and another disrupted a predicted CK1 phosphorylation site. Overexpression assays in zebrafish and reporter assays in vitro indicated that 4 variants were functionally null or hypomorphic, while 1 was dominant negative. This study provides evidence that, as in Caucasian populations, mutations in GRHL3 contribute to the risk of nonsyndromic CPO in the African population."]]
["agac_task3_119", ["Identification of distinct mutational patterns and new driver genes in oesophageal squamous cell carcinomas and adenocarcinomas.\nOBJECTIVES: Oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) and adenocarcinoma (OAC) are distinct cancers in terms of a number of clinical and epidemiological characteristics, complicating the design of clinical trials and biomarker developments. We analysed 1048 oesophageal tumour-germline pairs from both subtypes, to characterise their genomic features, and biological and clinical significance.\nDESIGN: Previously exome-sequenced samples were re-analysed to identify significantly mutated genes (SMGs) and mutational signatures. The biological functions of novel SMGs were investigated using cell line and xenograft models. We further performed whole-genome bisulfite sequencing and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-seq to characterise epigenetic alterations.\nRESULTS: OSCC and OAC displayed nearly mutually exclusive sets of driver genes, indicating that they follow independent developmental paths. The combined sample size allowed the statistical identification of a number of novel subtype-specific SMGs, mutational signatures and prognostic biomarkers. Particularly, we identified a novel mutational signature similar to Catalogue Of Somatic Mutations In Cancer (COSMIC)signature 16, which has prognostic value in OSCC. Two newly discovered SMGs, CUL3 and ZFP36L2, were validated as important tumour-suppressors specific to the OSCC subtype. We further identified their additional loss-of-function mechanisms. CUL3 was homozygously deleted specifically in OSCC and other squamous cell cancers (SCCs). Notably, ZFP36L2 is associated with super-enhancer in healthy oesophageal mucosa; DNA hypermethylation in its super-enhancer reduced active histone markers in squamous cancer cells, suggesting an epigenetic inactivation of a super-enhancer-associated SCC suppressor.\nCONCLUSIONS: These data comprehensively contrast differences between OSCC and OAC at both genomic and epigenomic levels, and reveal novel molecular features for further delineating the pathophysiological mechanisms and treatment strategies for these cancers.", "Identification of distinct mutational patterns and new driver genes in oesophageal squamous cell carcinomas and adenocarcinomas.\nOBJECTIVES: Oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) and adenocarcinoma (OAC) are distinct cancers in terms of a number of clinical and epidemiological characteristics, complicating the design of clinical trials and biomarker developments. We analysed 1048 oesophageal tumour-germline pairs from both subtypes, to characterise their genomic features, and biological and clinical significance.\nDESIGN: Previously exome-sequenced samples were re-analysed to identify significantly mutated genes (SMGs) and mutational signatures. The biological functions of novel SMGs were investigated using cell line and xenograft models. We further performed whole-genome bisulfite sequencing and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-seq to characterise epigenetic alterations.\nRESULTS: OSCC and OAC displayed nearly mutually exclusive sets of driver genes, indicating that they follow independent developmental paths. The combined sample size allowed the statistical identification of a number of novel subtype-specific SMGs, mutational signatures and prognostic biomarkers. Particularly, we identified a novel mutational signature similar to Catalogue Of Somatic Mutations In Cancer (COSMIC)signature 16, which has prognostic value in OSCC. Two newly discovered SMGs, CUL3 and ZFP36L2, were validated as important tumour-suppressors specific to the OSCC subtype. We further identified their additional loss-of-function mechanisms. CUL3 was homozygously deleted specifically in OSCC and other squamous cell cancers (SCCs). Notably, ZFP36L2 is associated with super-enhancer in healthy oesophageal mucosa; DNA hypermethylation in its super-enhancer reduced active histone markers in squamous cancer cells, suggesting an epigenetic inactivation of a super-enhancer-associated SCC suppressor.\nCONCLUSIONS: These data comprehensively contrast differences between OSCC and OAC at both genomic and epigenomic levels, and reveal novel molecular features for further delineating the pathophysiological mechanisms and treatment strategies for these cancers."]]
["agac_task3_120", ["Progranulin haploinsufficiency reduces amyloid beta deposition in Alzheimer's disease model mice.\nGranulin (Grn) mutations were identified in familial frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) patients with TAR DNA-binding protein of 43 kd (TDP-43) pathology. Grn transcript haploinsufficiency is proposed as a disease mechanism that leads to the loss of functional progranulin (PGRN) protein. Thus, these mutations are strongly involved in FTLD pathogenesis. Moreover, recent findings indicate that Grn mutations are associated with other neurodegenerative disorders with tau pathology, including Alzheimer's disease. To investigate the influence of PGRN on amyloid beta (A\u03b2) accumulation, amyloid precursor protein (APP) transgenic mice were interbred with Grn-deficient mice, producing APP transgenic mice harboring the Grn hemizygote (APP/Grn+/-). Brains were collected from 16-18-month-old APP and APP/Grn+/- mice and sequential extraction of proteins, immunoblotting and immunohistochemical analysis were performed. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that the number and area of A\u03b2 plaque was significantly decreased in APP/Grn+/- mice as compared to APP mice. Immunoblotting analysis revealed that A\u03b2 was reduced in the sarkosyl-insoluble fraction of 16-18-month-old APP/Grn+/- mice as compared with that of APP transgenic mice. Our data suggest that PGRN haploinsufficiency may decrease accumulation of A\u03b2."]]
["agac_task3_121", ["A gain-of-function mutation in TNFRSF13B is a candidate for predisposition to familial or sporadic immune thrombocytopenia.\nBACKGROUND: Most immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) is sporadic but a positive family history of ITP in some patients suggests that hereditary forms exist. Due to the rarity of familial ITP families available for study and the heterogeneity of sporadic ITP, family linkage analysis or genome wide association studies are limited.\nOBJECTIVES: Based on one ITP pedigree, we try to identify the predisposing gene in familial or sporadic ITP and reveal the way in which it causes thrombocytopenia.\nMETHODS: Gene expression profiling analysis and whole-exome sequencing was performed on samples from familial ITP members, sporadic ITP cases and healthy individuals. We also evaluated the influence of potential pathogenic mutation on immune function and megakaryocyte apoptosis.\nRESULTS: Whole-exome sequencing identified a potential pathologic p.G76S heterozygous mutation on the TNFRSF13B gene in familial ITP patients. ITP patients harboring G76S mutation displayed upregulated \"cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction\" signal, increased serum TNF\u03b1, IL-17\u03b1, IFN\u03b3 and BAFF levels, and enhanced binding capacity of APRIL ligand to B cells. Additionally, EBV-transformed B cells with the G76S mutation could induce human megakaryocyte line (Meg-01) apoptosis significantly.\nCONCLUSION: p.G76S mutation on TNFRSF13B gene is responsible for ITP, and is a genetic predisposing factor for familial or sporadic ITP. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved."]]
["agac_task3_122", ["Deciphering the molecular basis of ferroportin resistance to hepcidin: Structure/function analysis of rare SLC40A1 missense mutations found in suspected hemochromatosis type 4 patients.\nGenetic medicine applied to the study of hemochromatosis has identified the systemic loop controlling iron homeostasis, centered on hepcidin-ferroportin interaction. Current challenges are to dissect the molecular pathways underlying liver hepcidin synthesis in response to circulatory iron, HFE, TFR2, HJV, TMPRSS6 and BMP6 functions, and to define the major structural elements of hepcidin-ferroportin interaction. We built a first 3D model of human ferroportin structure, using the crystal structure of EmrD, a bacterial drug efflux transporter of the Major Facilitator Superfamily, as template. The model enabled study of disease-associated mutations, and guided mutagenesis experiments to determine the role of conserved residues in protein stability and iron transport. Results revealed novel amino acids that are critical for the iron export function and the hepcidin-mediated inhibition mechanism: for example, tryptophan 42, localized in the extracellular end of the ferroportin pore and involved in both biological functions. Here, we propose a strategy that is not limited to structure analysis, but integrates information from different sources, including human disease-associated mutations and functional in vitro assays. The first major hypothesis of this PhD thesis is that ferroportin resistance to hepcidin relies on different molecular mechanisms that are critical for ferroportin endocytosis, and include at least three fundamental steps: (i) hepcidin binding to ferroportin, (ii) structural reorganization of the N- and C-ter ferroportin lobes, and (iii) ferroportin ubiquitination."]]
["agac_task3_123", ["Impairment of different protein domains causes variable clinical presentation within Pitt-Hopkins syndrome and suggests intragenic molecular syndromology of TCF4.\nPitt-Hopkins syndrome is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by severe intellectual disability and a distinctive facial gestalt. It is caused by haploinsufficiency of the TCF4 gene. The TCF4 protein has different functional domains, with the NLS (nuclear localization signal) domain coded by exons 7-8 and the bHLH (basic Helix-Loop-Helix) domain coded by exon 18. Several alternatively spliced TCF4 variants have been described, allowing for translation of variable protein isoforms. Typical PTHS patients have impairment of at least the bHLH domain. To which extent impairment of the remaining domains contributes to the final phenotype is not clear. There is recent evidence that certain loss-of-function variants disrupting TCF4 are associated with mild ID, but not with typical PTHS. We describe a frameshift-causing partial gene deletion encompassing exons 4-6 of TCF4 in an adult patient with mild ID and nonspecific facial dysmorphisms but without the typical features of PTHS, and a c.520C\u00a0>\u00a0T nonsense variant within exon 8 in a child presenting with a severe phenotype largely mimicking PTHS, but lacking the typical facial dysmorphism. Investigation on mRNA, along with literature review, led us to suggest a preliminary phenotypic map of loss-of-function variants affecting TCF4. An intragenic phenotypic map of loss-of-function variants in TCF4 is suggested here for the first time: variants within exons 1-4 and exons 4-6 give rise to a recurrent phenotype with mild ID not in the spectrum of Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (biallelic preservation of both the NLS and bHLH domains); variants within exons 7-8 cause a severe phenotype resembling PTHS but in absence of the typical facial dysmorphism (impairment limited to the NLS domain); variants within exons 9-19 cause typical Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (impairment of at least the bHLH domain). Understanding the TCF4 molecular syndromology can allow for proper nosology in the current era of whole genomic investigations."]]
["agac_task3_124", ["Enpp1 is an anti-aging factor that regulates Klotho under phosphate overload conditions.\nControl of phosphate metabolism is crucial to regulate aging in mammals. Klotho is a well-known anti-aging factor that regulates phosphate metabolism: mice mutant or deficient in Klotho exhibit phenotypes resembling human aging. Here we show that ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase 1 (Enpp1) is required for Klotho expression under phosphate overload conditions. Loss-of-function Enpp1 (ttw/ttw) mice under phosphate overload conditions exhibited phenotypes resembling human aging and Klotho mutants, such as short life span, arteriosclerosis and osteoporosis, with elevated serum 1,25(OH)2D3 levels. Enpp1 (ttw/ttw) mice also exhibited significantly reduced renal Klotho expression under phosphate overload conditions, and aging phenotypes in these mice were rescued by Klotho overexpression, a low vitamin D diet or vitamin D receptor knockout. These findings indicate that Enpp1 plays a crucial role in regulating aging via Klotho expression under phosphate overload conditions.", "Enpp1 is an anti-aging factor that regulates Klotho under phosphate overload conditions.\nControl of phosphate metabolism is crucial to regulate aging in mammals. Klotho is a well-known anti-aging factor that regulates phosphate metabolism: mice mutant or deficient in Klotho exhibit phenotypes resembling human aging. Here we show that ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase 1 (Enpp1) is required for Klotho expression under phosphate overload conditions. Loss-of-function Enpp1 (ttw/ttw) mice under phosphate overload conditions exhibited phenotypes resembling human aging and Klotho mutants, such as short life span, arteriosclerosis and osteoporosis, with elevated serum 1,25(OH)2D3 levels. Enpp1 (ttw/ttw) mice also exhibited significantly reduced renal Klotho expression under phosphate overload conditions, and aging phenotypes in these mice were rescued by Klotho overexpression, a low vitamin D diet or vitamin D receptor knockout. These findings indicate that Enpp1 plays a crucial role in regulating aging via Klotho expression under phosphate overload conditions."]]
["agac_task3_125", ["A Braf kinase-inactive mutant induces lung adenocarcinoma.\nThe initiating oncogenic event in almost half of human lung adenocarcinomas is still unknown, a fact that complicates the development of selective targeted therapies. Yet these tumours harbour a number of alterations without obvious oncogenic function including BRAF-inactivating mutations. Inactivating BRAF mutants in lung predominate over the activating V600E mutant that is frequently observed in other tumour types. Here we demonstrate that the expression of an endogenous Braf(D631A) kinase-inactive isoform in mice (corresponding to the human BRAF(D594A) mutation) triggers lung adenocarcinoma in vivo, indicating that BRAF-inactivating mutations are initiating events in lung oncogenesis. Moreover, inactivating BRAF mutations have also been identified in a subset of KRAS-driven human lung tumours. Co-expression of Kras(G12V) and Braf(D631A) in mouse lung cells markedly enhances tumour initiation, a phenomenon mediated by Craf kinase activity, and effectively accelerates tumour progression when activated in advanced lung adenocarcinomas. We also report a key role for the wild-type Braf kinase in sustaining Kras(G12V)/Braf(D631A)-driven tumours. Ablation of the wild-type Braf allele prevents the development of lung adenocarcinoma by inducing a further increase in MAPK signalling that results in oncogenic toxicity; this effect can be abolished by pharmacological inhibition of Mek to restore tumour growth. However, the loss of wild-type Braf also induces transdifferentiation of club cells, which leads to the rapid development of lethal intrabronchiolar lesions. These observations indicate that the signal intensity of the MAPK pathway is a critical determinant not only in tumour development, but also in dictating the nature of the cancer-initiating cell and ultimately the resulting tumour phenotype."]]
["agac_task3_126", ["Loss-of-function but not dominant-negative intragenic IKZF1 deletions are associated with an adverse prognosis in adult BCR-ABL-negative acute lymphoblastic leukemia.\nGenetic alterations of the transcription factor IKZF1 (\"IKAROS\") are detected in around 15-30% of cases of BCR-ABL-negative B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Different types of intragenic deletions have been observed, resulting in a functionally inactivated allele (\"loss-of-function\") or in \"dominant-negative\" isoforms. The prognostic impact of these alterations especially in adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia is not well defined. We analyzed 482 well-characterized cases of adult BCR-ABL-negative B-precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia uniformly treated in the framework of the GMALL studies and detected IKZF1 alterations in 128 cases (27%). In 20%, the IKZF1 alteration was present in a large fraction of leukemic cells (\"high deletion load\") while in 7% it was detected only in small subclones (\"low deletion load\"). Some patients showed more than one IKZF1 alteration (8%). Patients exhibiting a loss-of-function isoform with high deletion load had a shorter overall survival (OS at 5 years 28% vs. 59%, p<0.0001), also significant in a subgroup analysis of standard risk patients according to GMALL classification (OS at 5 years 37% vs. 68%, p=0.0002). Low deletion load or dominant-negative IKZF1 alterations had no prognostic impact. The results thus suggest that there is a clear distinction between loss-of-function and dominant-negative IKZF1 deletions. Affected patients should thus be monitored for minimal residual disease carefully to detect incipient relapses at an early stage and they are potential candidates for alternative or intensified treatment regimes. Registered at http://www.clinicaltrials.gov: NCT00199056, NCT00198991."]]
["agac_task3_127", ["Allelic Complexity in Long QT Syndrome: A Family-Case Study.\nCongenital long QT syndrome (LQTS) is associated with high genetic and allelic heterogeneity. In some cases, more than one genetic variant is identified in the same (compound heterozygosity) or different (digenic heterozygosity) genes, and subjects with multiple pathogenic mutations may have a more severe disease. Standard-of-care clinical genetic testing for this and other arrhythmia susceptibility syndromes improves the identification of complex genotypes. Therefore, it is important to distinguish between pathogenic mutations and benign rare variants. We identified four genetic variants (KCNQ1-p.R583H, KCNH2-p.C108Y, KCNH2-p.K897T, and KCNE1-p.G38S) in an LQTS family. On the basis of in silico analysis, clinical data from our family, and the evidence from previous studies, we analyzed two mutated channels, KCNQ1-p.R583H and KCNH2-p.C108Y, using the whole-cell patch clamp technique. We found that KCNQ1-p.R583H was not associated with a severe functional impairment, whereas KCNH2-p.C108Y, a novel variant, encoded a non-functional channel that exerts dominant-negative effects on the wild-type. Notably, the common variants KCNH2-p.K897T and KCNE1-p.G38S were previously reported to produce more severe phenotypes when combined with disease-causing alleles. Our results indicate that the novel KCNH2-C108Y variant can be a pathogenic LQTS mutation, whereas KCNQ1-p.R583H, KCNH2-p.K897T, and KCNE1-p.G38S could be LQTS modifiers."]]
["agac_task3_128", ["Lethal digenic mutations in the K(+) channels Kir4.1 (KCNJ10) and SLACK (KCNT1) associated with severe-disabling seizures and neurodevelopmental delay.\nA 2-year-old boy presented profound developmental delay, failure to thrive, ataxia, hypotonia and tonic-clonic seizures that caused the death of the patient. Targeted and whole-exome sequencing revealed two heterozygous missense variants: a novel mutation in KCNJ10 gene that encodes for the inwardly-rectifying K(+) channel Kir4.1 and another previously characterized mutation in KCNT1 that encodes for the Na(+)-activated K(+) channel known as Slo2.2 or SLACK. The objectives of this study were to perform the clinical and genetic characterization of the proband and his family and to examine the functional consequence of the Kir4.1 mutation. The mutant and wild-type KCNJ10 constructs were generated and heterologously expressed in Xenopus laevis oocytes, and whole-cell K(+) currents were measured using the two-electrode voltage-clamp technique. The KCNJ10 mutation c.652C>T resulted in a p.L218F substitution at a highly conserved residue site. Wild-type KCNJ10 expression yielded robust Kir currents, while currents from oocytes expressing the mutation were reduced. Western Blot analysis revealed reduced protein expression by the mutation. Kir5.1 subunits display selective heteromultimerization with Kir4.1 constituting channels with unique kinetics. The effect of the mutation on Kir4.1/5.1 channel activity was twofold: a reduction in current amplitudes and an increase in the pH-dependent inhibition. We thus report a novel loss-of-function mutation in Kir4.1 found in a patient with a co-exiting mutation in SLACK channels that results in a fatal disease.", "Lethal digenic mutations in the K(+) channels Kir4.1 (KCNJ10) and SLACK (KCNT1) associated with severe-disabling seizures and neurodevelopmental delay.\nA 2-year-old boy presented profound developmental delay, failure to thrive, ataxia, hypotonia and tonic-clonic seizures that caused the death of the patient. Targeted and whole-exome sequencing revealed two heterozygous missense variants: a novel mutation in KCNJ10 gene that encodes for the inwardly-rectifying K(+) channel Kir4.1 and another previously characterized mutation in KCNT1 that encodes for the Na(+)-activated K(+) channel known as Slo2.2 or SLACK. The objectives of this study were to perform the clinical and genetic characterization of the proband and his family and to examine the functional consequence of the Kir4.1 mutation. The mutant and wild-type KCNJ10 constructs were generated and heterologously expressed in Xenopus laevis oocytes, and whole-cell K(+) currents were measured using the two-electrode voltage-clamp technique. The KCNJ10 mutation c.652C>T resulted in a p.L218F substitution at a highly conserved residue site. Wild-type KCNJ10 expression yielded robust Kir currents, while currents from oocytes expressing the mutation were reduced. Western Blot analysis revealed reduced protein expression by the mutation. Kir5.1 subunits display selective heteromultimerization with Kir4.1 constituting channels with unique kinetics. The effect of the mutation on Kir4.1/5.1 channel activity was twofold: a reduction in current amplitudes and an increase in the pH-dependent inhibition. We thus report a novel loss-of-function mutation in Kir4.1 found in a patient with a co-exiting mutation in SLACK channels that results in a fatal disease."]]
["agac_task3_129", ["Equivalent missense variant in the FOXP2 and FOXP1 transcription factors causes distinct neurodevelopmental disorders.\nThe closely related paralogues FOXP2 and FOXP1 encode transcription factors with shared functions in the development of many tissues, including the brain. However, while mutations in FOXP2 lead to a speech/language disorder characterized by childhood apraxia of speech (CAS), the clinical profile of FOXP1 variants includes a broader neurodevelopmental phenotype with global developmental delay, intellectual disability, and speech/language impairment. Using clinical whole-exome sequencing, we report an identical de novo missense FOXP1 variant identified in three unrelated patients. The variant, p.R514H, is located in the forkhead-box DNA-binding domain and is equivalent to the well-studied p.R553H FOXP2 variant that cosegregates with CAS in a large UK family. We present here for the first time a direct comparison of the molecular and clinical consequences of the same mutation affecting the equivalent residue in FOXP1 and FOXP2. Detailed functional characterization of the two variants in cell model systems revealed very similar molecular consequences, including aberrant subcellular localization, disruption of transcription factor activity, and deleterious effects on protein interactions. Nonetheless, clinical manifestations were broader and more severe in the three cases carrying the p.R514H FOXP1 variant than in individuals with the p.R553H variant related to CAS, highlighting divergent roles of FOXP2 and FOXP1 in neurodevelopment.", "Equivalent missense variant in the FOXP2 and FOXP1 transcription factors causes distinct neurodevelopmental disorders.\nThe closely related paralogues FOXP2 and FOXP1 encode transcription factors with shared functions in the development of many tissues, including the brain. However, while mutations in FOXP2 lead to a speech/language disorder characterized by childhood apraxia of speech (CAS), the clinical profile of FOXP1 variants includes a broader neurodevelopmental phenotype with global developmental delay, intellectual disability, and speech/language impairment. Using clinical whole-exome sequencing, we report an identical de novo missense FOXP1 variant identified in three unrelated patients. The variant, p.R514H, is located in the forkhead-box DNA-binding domain and is equivalent to the well-studied p.R553H FOXP2 variant that cosegregates with CAS in a large UK family. We present here for the first time a direct comparison of the molecular and clinical consequences of the same mutation affecting the equivalent residue in FOXP1 and FOXP2. Detailed functional characterization of the two variants in cell model systems revealed very similar molecular consequences, including aberrant subcellular localization, disruption of transcription factor activity, and deleterious effects on protein interactions. Nonetheless, clinical manifestations were broader and more severe in the three cases carrying the p.R514H FOXP1 variant than in individuals with the p.R553H variant related to CAS, highlighting divergent roles of FOXP2 and FOXP1 in neurodevelopment.", "Equivalent missense variant in the FOXP2 and FOXP1 transcription factors causes distinct neurodevelopmental disorders.\nThe closely related paralogues FOXP2 and FOXP1 encode transcription factors with shared functions in the development of many tissues, including the brain. However, while mutations in FOXP2 lead to a speech/language disorder characterized by childhood apraxia of speech (CAS), the clinical profile of FOXP1 variants includes a broader neurodevelopmental phenotype with global developmental delay, intellectual disability, and speech/language impairment. Using clinical whole-exome sequencing, we report an identical de novo missense FOXP1 variant identified in three unrelated patients. The variant, p.R514H, is located in the forkhead-box DNA-binding domain and is equivalent to the well-studied p.R553H FOXP2 variant that cosegregates with CAS in a large UK family. We present here for the first time a direct comparison of the molecular and clinical consequences of the same mutation affecting the equivalent residue in FOXP1 and FOXP2. Detailed functional characterization of the two variants in cell model systems revealed very similar molecular consequences, including aberrant subcellular localization, disruption of transcription factor activity, and deleterious effects on protein interactions. Nonetheless, clinical manifestations were broader and more severe in the three cases carrying the p.R514H FOXP1 variant than in individuals with the p.R553H variant related to CAS, highlighting divergent roles of FOXP2 and FOXP1 in neurodevelopment.", "Equivalent missense variant in the FOXP2 and FOXP1 transcription factors causes distinct neurodevelopmental disorders.\nThe closely related paralogues FOXP2 and FOXP1 encode transcription factors with shared functions in the development of many tissues, including the brain. However, while mutations in FOXP2 lead to a speech/language disorder characterized by childhood apraxia of speech (CAS), the clinical profile of FOXP1 variants includes a broader neurodevelopmental phenotype with global developmental delay, intellectual disability, and speech/language impairment. Using clinical whole-exome sequencing, we report an identical de novo missense FOXP1 variant identified in three unrelated patients. The variant, p.R514H, is located in the forkhead-box DNA-binding domain and is equivalent to the well-studied p.R553H FOXP2 variant that cosegregates with CAS in a large UK family. We present here for the first time a direct comparison of the molecular and clinical consequences of the same mutation affecting the equivalent residue in FOXP1 and FOXP2. Detailed functional characterization of the two variants in cell model systems revealed very similar molecular consequences, including aberrant subcellular localization, disruption of transcription factor activity, and deleterious effects on protein interactions. Nonetheless, clinical manifestations were broader and more severe in the three cases carrying the p.R514H FOXP1 variant than in individuals with the p.R553H variant related to CAS, highlighting divergent roles of FOXP2 and FOXP1 in neurodevelopment."]]
["agac_task3_130", ["Equivalent missense variant in the FOXP2 and FOXP1 transcription factors causes distinct neurodevelopmental disorders.\nThe closely related paralogues FOXP2 and FOXP1 encode transcription factors with shared functions in the development of many tissues, including the brain. However, while mutations in FOXP2 lead to a speech/language disorder characterized by childhood apraxia of speech (CAS), the clinical profile of FOXP1 variants includes a broader neurodevelopmental phenotype with global developmental delay, intellectual disability, and speech/language impairment. Using clinical whole-exome sequencing, we report an identical de novo missense FOXP1 variant identified in three unrelated patients. The variant, p.R514H, is located in the forkhead-box DNA-binding domain and is equivalent to the well-studied p.R553H FOXP2 variant that cosegregates with CAS in a large UK family. We present here for the first time a direct comparison of the molecular and clinical consequences of the same mutation affecting the equivalent residue in FOXP1 and FOXP2. Detailed functional characterization of the two variants in cell model systems revealed very similar molecular consequences, including aberrant subcellular localization, disruption of transcription factor activity, and deleterious effects on protein interactions. Nonetheless, clinical manifestations were broader and more severe in the three cases carrying the p.R514H FOXP1 variant than in individuals with the p.R553H variant related to CAS, highlighting divergent roles of FOXP2 and FOXP1 in neurodevelopment."]]
["agac_task3_131", ["D242N, a KV7.1 LQTS mutation uncovers a key residue for IKs voltage dependence.\nKV7.1 and KCNE1 co-assemble to give rise to the IKs current, one of the most important repolarizing currents of the cardiac action potential. Its relevance is underscored by the identification of >500 mutations in KV7.1 and, at least, 36 in KCNE1, that cause Long QT Syndrome (LQTS). The aim of this study was to characterize the biophysical and cellular consequences of the D242N KV7.1 mutation associated with the LQTS. The mutation is located in the S4 transmembrane segment, within the voltage sensor of the KV7.1 channel, disrupting the conserved charge balance of this region. Perforated patch-clamp experiments show that, unexpectedly, the mutation did not disrupt the voltage-dependent activation but it removed the inactivation and slowed the activation kinetics of D242N KV7.1 channels. Biotinylation of cell-surface protein and co-immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that neither plasma membrane targeting nor co-assembly between KV7.1 and KCNE1 was altered by the mutation. However, the association of D242N KV7.1 with KCNE1 strongly shifted the voltage dependence of activation to more depolarized potentials (+50mV), hindering IKs current at physiologically relevant membrane potentials. Both functional and computational analysis suggest that the clinical phenotype of the LQTS patients carrying the D242N mutation is due to impaired action potential adaptation to exercise and, in particular, to increase in heart rate. Moreover, our data identify D242 aminoacidic position as a potential residue involved in the KCNE1-mediated regulation of the voltage dependence of activation of the KV7.1 channel."]]
["agac_task3_132", ["Differential calcium sensitivity in NaV 1.5 mixed syndrome mutants.\nKEY POINTS: SCN5a mutations may express gain-of-function (Long QT Syndrome-3), loss-of-function (Brugada Syndrome 1) or both (mixed syndromes), depending on the mutation and environmental triggers. One such trigger may be an increase in cytosolic calcium, accompanying exercise. Many mixed syndromes mutants, including \u2206KPQ, E1784K, 1795insD and Q1909R, are found in calcium-sensitive regions. Elevated cytosolic calcium attenuates gain-of-function properties in \u2206KPQ, 1795insD and Q1909R, but not in E1784K. By contrast, elevated cytosolic calcium further exacerbates gain-of-function in E1784K by destabilizing slow inactivation. Action potential modelling, using a modified O'Hara Rudy model, suggests that elevated heart rate rescues action potential duration in \u2206KPQ, 1795insD and Q1909R, but not in E1784K. Action potential simulations suggest that E1784K carriers have an increased intracellular sodium-to-calcium ratio under bradycardia and tachycardia conditions. Elevated cytosolic calcium, which is common during high heart rates, ameliorates or exacerbates the mixed syndrome phenotype depending on the genetic signature.\nABSTRACT: Inherited arrhythmias may arise from mutations in the gene for SCN5a, which encodes the cardiac voltage-gated sodium channel, NaV 1.5. Mutants in NaV 1.5 result in Brugada Syndrome (BrS1), Long-QT Syndrome (LQT3) or mixed syndromes (an overlap of BrS1/LQT3). Exercise is a potential arrhythmogenic trigger in mixed syndromes. We aimed to determine the effects of elevated cytosolic calcium, which is common during exercise, in mixed syndrome NaV 1.5 mutants. We used whole-cell patch clamp to assess the biophysical properties of NaV 1.5 wild-type (WT), \u2206KPQ, E1784K, 1795insD and Q1909R mutants in human embryonic kidney 293 cells transiently transfected with the NaV 1.5 \u03b1 subunit (WT or mutants), \u03b21 subunit and enhanced green fluorescent protein. Voltage-dependence and kinetics were measured at cytosolic calcium levels of approximately 0, 500\u00a0and 2500\u00a0nm. In silico, action potential (AP) model simulations were performed using a modified O'Hara Rudy model. Elevated cytosolic calcium attenuates the late sodium current in \u2206KPQ, 1795insD and Q1909R, but not in E1784K. Elevated cytosolic calcium restores steady-state slow inactivation (SSSI) to the WT-form in Q1909R, but depolarized SSSI in E1784K. Our AP simulations showed a frequency-dependent reduction of AP duration in \u2206KPQ, 1795insD and Q1909R carriers. In E1784K, AP duration is relatively prolonged at both low and high heart rates, resulting in a sodium overload. Cellular perturbations during exercise may affect BrS1/LQT3 patients differently depending on their individual genetic signature. Thus, exercise may be therapeutic or may be an arrhythmogenic trigger in some SCN5a patients.", "Differential calcium sensitivity in NaV 1.5 mixed syndrome mutants.\nKEY POINTS: SCN5a mutations may express gain-of-function (Long QT Syndrome-3), loss-of-function (Brugada Syndrome 1) or both (mixed syndromes), depending on the mutation and environmental triggers. One such trigger may be an increase in cytosolic calcium, accompanying exercise. Many mixed syndromes mutants, including \u2206KPQ, E1784K, 1795insD and Q1909R, are found in calcium-sensitive regions. Elevated cytosolic calcium attenuates gain-of-function properties in \u2206KPQ, 1795insD and Q1909R, but not in E1784K. By contrast, elevated cytosolic calcium further exacerbates gain-of-function in E1784K by destabilizing slow inactivation. Action potential modelling, using a modified O'Hara Rudy model, suggests that elevated heart rate rescues action potential duration in \u2206KPQ, 1795insD and Q1909R, but not in E1784K. Action potential simulations suggest that E1784K carriers have an increased intracellular sodium-to-calcium ratio under bradycardia and tachycardia conditions. Elevated cytosolic calcium, which is common during high heart rates, ameliorates or exacerbates the mixed syndrome phenotype depending on the genetic signature.\nABSTRACT: Inherited arrhythmias may arise from mutations in the gene for SCN5a, which encodes the cardiac voltage-gated sodium channel, NaV 1.5. Mutants in NaV 1.5 result in Brugada Syndrome (BrS1), Long-QT Syndrome (LQT3) or mixed syndromes (an overlap of BrS1/LQT3). Exercise is a potential arrhythmogenic trigger in mixed syndromes. We aimed to determine the effects of elevated cytosolic calcium, which is common during exercise, in mixed syndrome NaV 1.5 mutants. We used whole-cell patch clamp to assess the biophysical properties of NaV 1.5 wild-type (WT), \u2206KPQ, E1784K, 1795insD and Q1909R mutants in human embryonic kidney 293 cells transiently transfected with the NaV 1.5 \u03b1 subunit (WT or mutants), \u03b21 subunit and enhanced green fluorescent protein. Voltage-dependence and kinetics were measured at cytosolic calcium levels of approximately 0, 500\u00a0and 2500\u00a0nm. In silico, action potential (AP) model simulations were performed using a modified O'Hara Rudy model. Elevated cytosolic calcium attenuates the late sodium current in \u2206KPQ, 1795insD and Q1909R, but not in E1784K. Elevated cytosolic calcium restores steady-state slow inactivation (SSSI) to the WT-form in Q1909R, but depolarized SSSI in E1784K. Our AP simulations showed a frequency-dependent reduction of AP duration in \u2206KPQ, 1795insD and Q1909R carriers. In E1784K, AP duration is relatively prolonged at both low and high heart rates, resulting in a sodium overload. Cellular perturbations during exercise may affect BrS1/LQT3 patients differently depending on their individual genetic signature. Thus, exercise may be therapeutic or may be an arrhythmogenic trigger in some SCN5a patients."]]
["agac_task3_133", ["Genetic Diseases of PIEZO1 and PIEZO2 Dysfunction.\nMutations in the genes encoding the mechanosensitive cation channels PIEZO1 and\u00a0PIEZO2 are responsible for multiple hereditary human diseases. Loss-of-function mutations in the human PIEZO1 gene cause autosomal recessive congenital lymphatic dysplasia. Gain-of-function mutations in the human PIEZO1 gene cause the autosomal dominant hemolytic anemia, hereditary xerocytosis (also known as dehydrated stomatocytosis). Loss-of-function mutations in the human PIEZO2 gene cause an autosomal recessive syndrome of muscular atrophy with perinatal respiratory distress, arthrogryposis, and scoliosis. Gain-of-function mutations in the human PIEZO2 gene cause three clinical types of autosomal dominant distal arthrogryposis. This chapter will review the hereditary diseases caused by mutations in the PIEZO genes\u00a0and will discuss additional physiological systems in which PIEZO channel dysfunction may contribute to human disease pathophysiology.", "Genetic Diseases of PIEZO1 and PIEZO2 Dysfunction.\nMutations in the genes encoding the mechanosensitive cation channels PIEZO1 and\u00a0PIEZO2 are responsible for multiple hereditary human diseases. Loss-of-function mutations in the human PIEZO1 gene cause autosomal recessive congenital lymphatic dysplasia. Gain-of-function mutations in the human PIEZO1 gene cause the autosomal dominant hemolytic anemia, hereditary xerocytosis (also known as dehydrated stomatocytosis). Loss-of-function mutations in the human PIEZO2 gene cause an autosomal recessive syndrome of muscular atrophy with perinatal respiratory distress, arthrogryposis, and scoliosis. Gain-of-function mutations in the human PIEZO2 gene cause three clinical types of autosomal dominant distal arthrogryposis. This chapter will review the hereditary diseases caused by mutations in the PIEZO genes\u00a0and will discuss additional physiological systems in which PIEZO channel dysfunction may contribute to human disease pathophysiology.", "Genetic Diseases of PIEZO1 and PIEZO2 Dysfunction.\nMutations in the genes encoding the mechanosensitive cation channels PIEZO1 and\u00a0PIEZO2 are responsible for multiple hereditary human diseases. Loss-of-function mutations in the human PIEZO1 gene cause autosomal recessive congenital lymphatic dysplasia. Gain-of-function mutations in the human PIEZO1 gene cause the autosomal dominant hemolytic anemia, hereditary xerocytosis (also known as dehydrated stomatocytosis). Loss-of-function mutations in the human PIEZO2 gene cause an autosomal recessive syndrome of muscular atrophy with perinatal respiratory distress, arthrogryposis, and scoliosis. Gain-of-function mutations in the human PIEZO2 gene cause three clinical types of autosomal dominant distal arthrogryposis. This chapter will review the hereditary diseases caused by mutations in the PIEZO genes\u00a0and will discuss additional physiological systems in which PIEZO channel dysfunction may contribute to human disease pathophysiology."]]
["agac_task3_134", ["Genetic Diseases of PIEZO1 and PIEZO2 Dysfunction.\nMutations in the genes encoding the mechanosensitive cation channels PIEZO1 and\u00a0PIEZO2 are responsible for multiple hereditary human diseases. Loss-of-function mutations in the human PIEZO1 gene cause autosomal recessive congenital lymphatic dysplasia. Gain-of-function mutations in the human PIEZO1 gene cause the autosomal dominant hemolytic anemia, hereditary xerocytosis (also known as dehydrated stomatocytosis). Loss-of-function mutations in the human PIEZO2 gene cause an autosomal recessive syndrome of muscular atrophy with perinatal respiratory distress, arthrogryposis, and scoliosis. Gain-of-function mutations in the human PIEZO2 gene cause three clinical types of autosomal dominant distal arthrogryposis. This chapter will review the hereditary diseases caused by mutations in the PIEZO genes\u00a0and will discuss additional physiological systems in which PIEZO channel dysfunction may contribute to human disease pathophysiology.", "Genetic Diseases of PIEZO1 and PIEZO2 Dysfunction.\nMutations in the genes encoding the mechanosensitive cation channels PIEZO1 and\u00a0PIEZO2 are responsible for multiple hereditary human diseases. Loss-of-function mutations in the human PIEZO1 gene cause autosomal recessive congenital lymphatic dysplasia. Gain-of-function mutations in the human PIEZO1 gene cause the autosomal dominant hemolytic anemia, hereditary xerocytosis (also known as dehydrated stomatocytosis). Loss-of-function mutations in the human PIEZO2 gene cause an autosomal recessive syndrome of muscular atrophy with perinatal respiratory distress, arthrogryposis, and scoliosis. Gain-of-function mutations in the human PIEZO2 gene cause three clinical types of autosomal dominant distal arthrogryposis. This chapter will review the hereditary diseases caused by mutations in the PIEZO genes\u00a0and will discuss additional physiological systems in which PIEZO channel dysfunction may contribute to human disease pathophysiology.", "Genetic Diseases of PIEZO1 and PIEZO2 Dysfunction.\nMutations in the genes encoding the mechanosensitive cation channels PIEZO1 and\u00a0PIEZO2 are responsible for multiple hereditary human diseases. Loss-of-function mutations in the human PIEZO1 gene cause autosomal recessive congenital lymphatic dysplasia. Gain-of-function mutations in the human PIEZO1 gene cause the autosomal dominant hemolytic anemia, hereditary xerocytosis (also known as dehydrated stomatocytosis). Loss-of-function mutations in the human PIEZO2 gene cause an autosomal recessive syndrome of muscular atrophy with perinatal respiratory distress, arthrogryposis, and scoliosis. Gain-of-function mutations in the human PIEZO2 gene cause three clinical types of autosomal dominant distal arthrogryposis. This chapter will review the hereditary diseases caused by mutations in the PIEZO genes\u00a0and will discuss additional physiological systems in which PIEZO channel dysfunction may contribute to human disease pathophysiology."]]
["agac_task3_135", ["Genetic Diseases of PIEZO1 and PIEZO2 Dysfunction.\nMutations in the genes encoding the mechanosensitive cation channels PIEZO1 and\u00a0PIEZO2 are responsible for multiple hereditary human diseases. Loss-of-function mutations in the human PIEZO1 gene cause autosomal recessive congenital lymphatic dysplasia. Gain-of-function mutations in the human PIEZO1 gene cause the autosomal dominant hemolytic anemia, hereditary xerocytosis (also known as dehydrated stomatocytosis). Loss-of-function mutations in the human PIEZO2 gene cause an autosomal recessive syndrome of muscular atrophy with perinatal respiratory distress, arthrogryposis, and scoliosis. Gain-of-function mutations in the human PIEZO2 gene cause three clinical types of autosomal dominant distal arthrogryposis. This chapter will review the hereditary diseases caused by mutations in the PIEZO genes\u00a0and will discuss additional physiological systems in which PIEZO channel dysfunction may contribute to human disease pathophysiology."]]
["agac_task3_136", ["A patient with germ-line gain-of-function PDGFRB p.N666H mutation and marked clinical response to imatinib.\nPurposeHeterozygous germ-line activating mutations in PDGFRB cause Kosaki and Penttinen syndromes and myofibromatosis. We describe a 10-year-old child with a germ-line PDGFRB p.N666H mutation who responded to the tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib by inhibition of PDGFRB.MethodsThe impact of p.N666H on PDGFRB function and sensitivity to imatinib was studied in cell culture.ResultsCells expressing the p.N666H mutation showed constitutive PDGFRB tyrosine phosphorylation. PDGF-independent proliferation was abolished by imatinib at 1\u2009\u03bcM concentration. Patient fibroblasts showed constitutive receptor tyrosine phosphorylation that was also abrogated by imatinib with reduced proliferation of treated cells.This led to patient treatment with imatinib at 400\u2009mg daily (340\u2009mg/m(2)) for a year with objective improvement of debilitating hand and foot contractures, reduced facial coarseness, and significant improvement in quality of life. New small subcutaneous nodules developed, but remained stable. Transient leukopenia, neutropenia, and fatigue resolved without intervention; however, mildly decreased growth velocity resulted in reducing imatinib dose to 200\u2009mg daily (170\u2009mg/m(2)). The patient continues treatment with ongoing clinical response.ConclusionTo our knowledge, this is one of the first personalized treatments of a congenital disorder caused by a germ-line PDGF receptor mutation with a PDGFRB inhibitor.GENETICS in MEDICINE advance online publication, 20 July 2017; doi:10.1038/gim.2017.104.", "A patient with germ-line gain-of-function PDGFRB p.N666H mutation and marked clinical response to imatinib.\nPurposeHeterozygous germ-line activating mutations in PDGFRB cause Kosaki and Penttinen syndromes and myofibromatosis. We describe a 10-year-old child with a germ-line PDGFRB p.N666H mutation who responded to the tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib by inhibition of PDGFRB.MethodsThe impact of p.N666H on PDGFRB function and sensitivity to imatinib was studied in cell culture.ResultsCells expressing the p.N666H mutation showed constitutive PDGFRB tyrosine phosphorylation. PDGF-independent proliferation was abolished by imatinib at 1\u2009\u03bcM concentration. Patient fibroblasts showed constitutive receptor tyrosine phosphorylation that was also abrogated by imatinib with reduced proliferation of treated cells.This led to patient treatment with imatinib at 400\u2009mg daily (340\u2009mg/m(2)) for a year with objective improvement of debilitating hand and foot contractures, reduced facial coarseness, and significant improvement in quality of life. New small subcutaneous nodules developed, but remained stable. Transient leukopenia, neutropenia, and fatigue resolved without intervention; however, mildly decreased growth velocity resulted in reducing imatinib dose to 200\u2009mg daily (170\u2009mg/m(2)). The patient continues treatment with ongoing clinical response.ConclusionTo our knowledge, this is one of the first personalized treatments of a congenital disorder caused by a germ-line PDGF receptor mutation with a PDGFRB inhibitor.GENETICS in MEDICINE advance online publication, 20 July 2017; doi:10.1038/gim.2017.104."]]
["agac_task3_137", ["Exome sequencing reveals independent SGCD deletions causing limb girdle muscular dystrophy in Boston terriers.\nBACKGROUND: Limb-girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMDs) are a heterogeneous group of inherited autosomal myopathies that preferentially affect voluntary muscles of the shoulders and hips. LGMD has been clinically described in several breeds of dogs, but the responsible mutations are unknown. The clinical presentation in dogs is characterized by marked muscle weakness and atrophy in the shoulder and hips during puppyhood.\nMETHODS: Following clinical evaluation, the identification of the dystrophic histological phenotype on muscle histology, and demonstration of the absence of sarcoglycan-sarcospan complex by immunostaining, whole exome sequencing was performed on five Boston terriers: one affected dog and its three family members and one unrelated affected dog.\nRESULTS: Within sarcoglycan-\u03b4 (SGCD), a two base pair deletion segregating with LGMD in the family was discovered, and a deletion encompassing exons 7 and 8 was found in the unrelated dog. Both mutations are predicted to cause an absence of SGCD protein, confirmed by immunohistochemistry. The mutations are private to each family.\nCONCLUSIONS: Here, we describe the first cases of canine LGMD characterized at the molecular level with the classification of LGMD2F."]]
["agac_task3_138", ["Early-onset autoimmune disease due to a heterozygous loss-of-function mutation in TNFAIP3 (A20).\n"]]
["agac_task3_139", ["Inducible activation of FGFR2 in adult mice promotes bone formation after bone marrow ablation.\nApert syndrome is one of the most severe craniosynostoses, resulting from gain-of-function mutations in fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2). Previous studies have shown that gain-of-function mutations of FGFR2 (S252W or P253R) cause skull malformation of human Apert syndrome by affecting both chondrogenesis and osteogenesis, underscoring the key role of FGFR2 in bone development. However, the effects of FGFR2 on bone formation at the adult stage have not been fully investigated. To investigate the role of FGFR2 in bone formation, we generated mice with tamoxifen-inducible expression of mutant FGFR2 (P253R) at the adult stage. Mechanical bone marrow ablation (BMX) was performed in both wild-type and Fgfr2 mutant (MT) mice. Changes in newly formed trabecular bone were assessed by micro-computed tomography and bone histomorphometry. We found that MT mice exhibited increased trabecular bone formation and decreased bone resorption after BMX accompanied with a remarkable increase in bone marrow stromal cell recruitment and proliferation, osteoblast proliferation and differentiation, and enhanced Wnt/?-catenin activity. Furthermore, pharmacologically inhibiting Wnt/\u03b2-catenin signaling can partially reverse the increased trabecular bone formation and decreased bone resorption in MT mice after BMX. Our data demonstrate that gain-of-function mutation in FGFR2 exerts a Wnt/\u03b2-catenin-dependent anabolic effect on trabecular bone by promoting bone formation and inhibiting bone resorption at the adult stage. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved."]]
["agac_task3_140", ["Human I\u03baB\u03b1 Gain of Function: a Severe and Syndromic Immunodeficiency.\nGermline heterozygous gain-of-function (GOF) mutations of NFKBIA, encoding I\u03baB\u03b1, cause an autosomal dominant (AD) form of anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency (EDA-ID). Fourteen unrelated patients have been reported since the identification of the first case in 2003. All mutations enhanced the inhibitory activity of I\u03baB\u03b1, by preventing its phosphorylation on serine 32 or 36 and its subsequent degradation. The mutation certainly or probably occurred de novo in 13 patients, whereas it was inherited from a parent with somatic mosaicism in one patient. Eleven mutations, belonging to two groups, were identified: (i) missense mutations affecting S32, S36, or neighboring residues (8 mutations, 11 patients) and (ii) nonsense mutations upstream from S32 associated with the reinitiation of translation downstream from S36 (3 mutations, 3 patients). Thirteen patients had developmental features of EDA, the severity and nature of which differed between cases. All patient cells tested displayed impaired NF-\u03baB-mediated responses to the stimulation of various surface receptors involved in cell-intrinsic (fibroblasts), innate (monocytes), and adaptive (B and T cells) immunity, including TLRs, IL-1Rs, TNFRs, TCR, and BCR. All patients had profound B-cell deficiency. Specific immunological features, found in some, but not all patients, included a lack of peripheral lymph nodes, lymphocytosis, dysfunctional \u03b1/\u03b2 T cells, and a lack of circulating \u03b3/\u03b4 T cells. The patients had various pyogenic, mycobacterial, fungal, and viral severe infections. Patients with a missense mutation tended to display more severe phenotypes, probably due to higher levels of GOF proteins. In the absence of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT), this condition cause death before the age of 1\u00a0year (one child). Two survivors have been on prophylaxis (at 9 and 22\u00a0years). Six children died after HSCT. Five survived, four of whom have been on prophylaxis (3 to 21\u00a0years post HSCT), whereas one has been well with no prophylaxis. Heterozygous GOF mutations in I\u03baB\u03b1 underlie a severe and syndromic immunodeficiency, the interindividual variability of which might partly be ascribed to the dichotomy of missense and nonsense mutations, and the hematopoietic component of which can be rescued by HSCT.", "Human I\u03baB\u03b1 Gain of Function: a Severe and Syndromic Immunodeficiency.\nGermline heterozygous gain-of-function (GOF) mutations of NFKBIA, encoding I\u03baB\u03b1, cause an autosomal dominant (AD) form of anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency (EDA-ID). Fourteen unrelated patients have been reported since the identification of the first case in 2003. All mutations enhanced the inhibitory activity of I\u03baB\u03b1, by preventing its phosphorylation on serine 32 or 36 and its subsequent degradation. The mutation certainly or probably occurred de novo in 13 patients, whereas it was inherited from a parent with somatic mosaicism in one patient. Eleven mutations, belonging to two groups, were identified: (i) missense mutations affecting S32, S36, or neighboring residues (8 mutations, 11 patients) and (ii) nonsense mutations upstream from S32 associated with the reinitiation of translation downstream from S36 (3 mutations, 3 patients). Thirteen patients had developmental features of EDA, the severity and nature of which differed between cases. All patient cells tested displayed impaired NF-\u03baB-mediated responses to the stimulation of various surface receptors involved in cell-intrinsic (fibroblasts), innate (monocytes), and adaptive (B and T cells) immunity, including TLRs, IL-1Rs, TNFRs, TCR, and BCR. All patients had profound B-cell deficiency. Specific immunological features, found in some, but not all patients, included a lack of peripheral lymph nodes, lymphocytosis, dysfunctional \u03b1/\u03b2 T cells, and a lack of circulating \u03b3/\u03b4 T cells. The patients had various pyogenic, mycobacterial, fungal, and viral severe infections. Patients with a missense mutation tended to display more severe phenotypes, probably due to higher levels of GOF proteins. In the absence of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT), this condition cause death before the age of 1\u00a0year (one child). Two survivors have been on prophylaxis (at 9 and 22\u00a0years). Six children died after HSCT. Five survived, four of whom have been on prophylaxis (3 to 21\u00a0years post HSCT), whereas one has been well with no prophylaxis. Heterozygous GOF mutations in I\u03baB\u03b1 underlie a severe and syndromic immunodeficiency, the interindividual variability of which might partly be ascribed to the dichotomy of missense and nonsense mutations, and the hematopoietic component of which can be rescued by HSCT."]]
["agac_task3_141", ["Loss of function in ROBO1 is associated with tetralogy of Fallot and septal defects.\nBACKGROUND: Congenital heart disease (CHD) is a common birth defect affecting approximately 1% of newborns. Great progress has been made in elucidating the genetic aetiology of CHD with advances in genomic technology, which we leveraged in recovering a new pathway affecting heart development in humans previously known to affect heart development in an animal model.\nMETHODS: Four hundred and sixteen individuals from Thailand and the USA diagnosed with CHD and/or congenital diaphragmatic hernia were evaluated with chromosomal microarray and whole exome sequencing. The DECIPHER Consortium and medical literature were searched for additional patients. Murine hearts from ENU-induced mouse mutants and transgenic mice were evaluated using both episcopic confocal histopathology and troponin I stained sections.\nRESULTS: Loss of function ROBO1 variants were identified in three families; each proband had a ventricular septal defect, and one proband had tetralogy of Fallot. Additionally, a microdeletion in an individual with CHD was found in the medical literature. Mouse models showed perturbation of the Slit-Robo signalling pathway, causing septation and outflow tract defects and craniofacial anomalies. Two probands had variable facial features consistent with the mouse model.\nCONCLUSION: Our findings identify Slit-Robo as a significant pathway in human heart development and CHD."]]
["agac_task3_142", ["WNT10A mutation causes ectodermal dysplasia by impairing progenitor cell proliferation and KLF4-mediated differentiation.\nHuman WNT10A mutations are associated with developmental tooth abnormalities and adolescent onset of a broad range of ectodermal defects. Here we show that \u03b2-catenin pathway activity and adult epithelial progenitor proliferation are reduced in the absence of WNT10A, and identify Wnt-active self-renewing stem cells in affected tissues including hair follicles, sebaceous glands, taste buds, nails and sweat ducts. Human and mouse WNT10A mutant palmoplantar and tongue epithelia also display specific differentiation defects that are mimicked by loss of the transcription factor KLF4. We find that \u03b2-catenin interacts directly with region-specific LEF/TCF factors, and with KLF4 in differentiating, but not proliferating, cells to promote expression of specialized keratins required for normal tissue structure and integrity. Our data identify WNT10A as a critical ligand controlling adult epithelial proliferation and region-specific differentiation, and suggest downstream \u03b2-catenin pathway activation as a potential approach to ameliorate regenerative defects in WNT10A patients."]]
["agac_task3_143", ["Severe hypertriglyceridemia due to two novel loss-of-function lipoprotein lipase gene mutations (C310R/E396V) in a Chinese family associated with recurrent acute pancreatitis.\nLipoprotein lipase (LPL) is widely expressed in skeletal muscles, cardiac muscles as well as adipose tissue and involved in the catabolism of triglyceride. Herein we have systematically characterized two novel loss-of-function mutations in LPL from a Chinese family in which afflicted members were manifested by severe hypertriglyceridemia and recurrent pancreatitis. DNA sequencing revealed that the proband was a heterozygote carrying a novel c.T928C (p.C310R) mutation in exon 6 of the LPL gene. Another member of the family was detected to be a compound heterozygote who along with the c.T928C mutation also carried a novel missense mutation c.A1187T (p.E396V) in exon 8 of the LPL gene. Furthermore, COS-1 cells were transfected with lentiviruses containing the mutant LPL genes. While C310R markedly reduced the overall LPL protein level, COS-1 cells carrying E396V or double mutations contained similar overall LPL protein levels to the wild-type. The specific activity of the LPL mutants remained at comparable magnitude to the wild-type. However, few LPL were detected in the culture medium for the mutants, suggesting that both mutations caused aberrant triglyceride catabolism. More specifically, E396V and double mutations dampened the transport of LPL to the cell surface, while for the C310R mutation, reducing LPL protein level might be involved. By characterizing these two novel LPL mutations, this study has expanded our understanding on the pathogenesis of familial hypertriglyceridemia (FHTG)."]]
["agac_task3_144", ["PAI-1 gain-of-function genotype, factors increasing PAI-1 levels, and airway obstruction: The GALA II Cohort.\nBACKGROUND: PAI-1 gain-of-function variants promote airway fibrosis and are associated with asthma and with worse lung function in subjects with asthma.\nOBJECTIVE: We sought to determine whether the association of a gain-of-function polymorphism in plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) with airway obstruction is modified by asthma status, and whether any genotype effect persists after accounting for common exposures that increase PAI-1 level.\nMETHODS: We studied 2070 Latino children (8-21y) with genotypic and pulmonary function data from the GALA II cohort. We estimated the relationship of the PAI-1 risk allele with FEV1/FVC by multivariate linear regression, stratified by asthma status. We examined the association of the polymorphism with asthma and airway obstruction within asthmatics via multivariate logistic regression. We replicated associations in the SAPPHIRE cohort of African Americans (n=1056). Secondary analysis included the effect of the at-risk polymorphism on postbronchodilator lung function.\nRESULTS: There was an interaction between asthma status and the PAI-1 polymorphism on FEV1 /FVC (P=.03). The gain-of-function variants, genotypes (AA/AG), were associated with lower FEV1 /FVC in subjects with asthma (\u03b2=-1.25, CI: -2.14,-0.35, P=.006), but not in controls. Subjects with asthma and the AA/AG genotypes had a 5% decrease in FEV1 /FVC (P<.001). In asthmatics, the risk genotype (AA/AG) was associated with a 39% increase in risk of clinically relevant airway obstruction (OR=1.39, CI: 1.01, 1.92, P=.04). These associations persisted after exclusion of factors that increase PAI-1 including tobacco exposure and obesity.\nCONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: The decrease in the FEV1 /FVC ratio associated with the risk genotype was modified by asthma status. The genotype increased the odds of airway obstruction by 75% within asthmatics only. As exposures known to increase PAI-1 levels did not mitigate this association, PAI-1 may contribute to airway obstruction in the context of chronic asthmatic airway inflammation."]]
["agac_task3_145", ["GRIN2B gain of function mutations are sensitive to radiprodil, a negative allosteric modulator of GluN2B-containing NMDA receptors.\nDe novo gain of function mutations in GRIN2B encoding the GluN2B subunit of the N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor have been linked with epileptic encephalopathies, including infantile spasms. We investigated the effects of radiprodil, a selective GluN2B negative allosteric modulator and other non-selective NMDA receptor inhibitors on glutamate currents mediated by NMDA receptors containing mutated GluN2B subunits. The experiments were performed in Xenopus oocytes co-injected with the following human mRNAs: GRIN1/GRIN2B, GRIN1/GRIN2B-R540H, GRIN1/GRIN2B-N615I and GRIN1/GRIN2B-V618G. Glutamate displayed slightly increased potency in the R540H variant, but not in N615I and V618G variants. However, the inhibition by Mg(2+) was completely abolished in N615I and V618G variants. In fact, Mg(2+) enhanced glutamate responses in those variants. The potency of radiprodil to block glutamate-evoked currents was not affected in any of the variants, while the effects by non-selective NMDA inhibitors were greatly reduced in some of the variants. Additionally, in the Mg(2+) insensitive variants, radiprodil blocked glutamate-activated currents with the same potency as in the absence of Mg(2+). The gain of function observed in the reported GRIN2B variants could be a key pathophysiological factor leading to neuronal hyper-excitability in epileptic encephalopathies. The GluN2B-selective inhibitor radiprodil fully retained its pharmacological profile under these conditions, while other non-selective NMDA receptor antagonists lost their potency. Consequently, our data suggest that radiprodil may be a valuable therapeutic option for treatment of pediatric epileptic encephalopathies associated with GRIN2B mutations.", "GRIN2B gain of function mutations are sensitive to radiprodil, a negative allosteric modulator of GluN2B-containing NMDA receptors.\nDe novo gain of function mutations in GRIN2B encoding the GluN2B subunit of the N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor have been linked with epileptic encephalopathies, including infantile spasms. We investigated the effects of radiprodil, a selective GluN2B negative allosteric modulator and other non-selective NMDA receptor inhibitors on glutamate currents mediated by NMDA receptors containing mutated GluN2B subunits. The experiments were performed in Xenopus oocytes co-injected with the following human mRNAs: GRIN1/GRIN2B, GRIN1/GRIN2B-R540H, GRIN1/GRIN2B-N615I and GRIN1/GRIN2B-V618G. Glutamate displayed slightly increased potency in the R540H variant, but not in N615I and V618G variants. However, the inhibition by Mg(2+) was completely abolished in N615I and V618G variants. In fact, Mg(2+) enhanced glutamate responses in those variants. The potency of radiprodil to block glutamate-evoked currents was not affected in any of the variants, while the effects by non-selective NMDA inhibitors were greatly reduced in some of the variants. Additionally, in the Mg(2+) insensitive variants, radiprodil blocked glutamate-activated currents with the same potency as in the absence of Mg(2+). The gain of function observed in the reported GRIN2B variants could be a key pathophysiological factor leading to neuronal hyper-excitability in epileptic encephalopathies. The GluN2B-selective inhibitor radiprodil fully retained its pharmacological profile under these conditions, while other non-selective NMDA receptor antagonists lost their potency. Consequently, our data suggest that radiprodil may be a valuable therapeutic option for treatment of pediatric epileptic encephalopathies associated with GRIN2B mutations."]]
["agac_task3_146", ["Gene Co-Expression Network Analysis for Identifying Modules and Functionally Enriched Pathways in SCA2.\nSpinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2) is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disease caused by CAG repeat expansion in the ATXN2 gene. The repeat resides in an encoded region of the gene resulting in polyglutamine (polyQ) expansion which has been assumed to result in gain of function, predominantly, for the ATXN2 protein. We evaluated temporal cerebellar expression profiles by RNA sequencing of ATXN2Q127 mice vs wildtype littermates. ATXN2Q127 mice are characterized by a progressive motor phenotype onset, and have progressive cerebellar molecular and neurophysiological (Purkinje cell firing frequency) phenotypes. Our analysis revealed previously uncharacterized early and progressive abnormal patterning of cerebellar gene expression. Weighted Gene Coexpression Network Analysis (WGCNA) revealed four gene modules that were significantly correlated with disease status, composed primarily of genes associated with GTPase signaling, calcium signaling, and cell death. Of these genes, few overlapped with differentially expressed cerebellar genes that we identified in Atxn2-/- knockout mice vs wildtype littermates, suggesting that loss-of-function is not a significant component of disease pathology. We conclude that SCA2 is a disease characterized by gain of function for ATXN2."]]
["agac_task3_147", ["Loss of the homologous recombination gene rad51 leads to Fanconi anemia-like symptoms in zebrafish.\nRAD51 is an indispensable homologous recombination protein, necessary for strand invasion and crossing over. It has recently been designated as a Fanconi anemia (FA) gene, following the discovery of two patients carrying dominant-negative mutations. FA is a hereditary DNA-repair disorder characterized by various congenital abnormalities, progressive bone marrow failure, and cancer predisposition. In this report, we describe a viable vertebrate model of RAD51 loss. Zebrafish rad51 loss-of-function mutants developed key features of FA, including hypocellular kidney marrow, sensitivity to cross-linking agents, and decreased size. We show that some of these symptoms stem from both decreased proliferation and increased apoptosis of embryonic hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. Comutation of p53 was able to rescue the hematopoietic defects seen in the single mutants, but led to tumor development. We further demonstrate that prolonged inflammatory stress can exacerbate the hematological impairment, leading to an additional decrease in kidney marrow cell numbers. These findings strengthen the assignment of RAD51 as a Fanconi gene and provide more evidence for the notion that aberrant p53 signaling during embryogenesis leads to the hematological defects seen later in life in FA. Further research on this zebrafish FA model will lead to a deeper understanding of the molecular basis of bone marrow failure in FA and the cellular role of RAD51."]]
["agac_task3_148", ["Real-World Data on Prognostic Factors for Overall Survival in EGFR Mutation-Positive Advanced Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Patients Treated with First-Line Gefitinib.\nBACKGROUND: This study aimed to identify independent prognostic factors for overall survival (OS) of patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring an activating epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation and receiving gefitinib as first-line treatment in real-world practice.\nMATERIALS AND METHODS: We enrolled 226 patients from June 2011 to May 2013. During this period, gefitinib was the only EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor reimbursed by the Bureau of National Health Insurance of Taiwan.\nRESULTS: The median progression-free survival and median OS were 11.9 months (95% confidence interval [CI]: 9.7-14.2) and 26.9 months (21.2-32.5), respectively. The Cox proportional hazards regression model revealed that postoperative recurrence, performance status (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Grade [ECOG] \u22652), smoking index (\u226520 pack-years), liver metastasis at initial diagnosis, and chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection were independent prognostic factors for OS (hazard ratio [95% CI] 0.3 [0.11-0.83], p\u2009=\u2009.02; 2.69 [1.60-4.51], p\u2009<\u2009.001; 1.92 [1.24-2.97], p\u2009=\u2009.003; 2.26 [1.34-3.82], p\u2009=\u2009.002; 3.38 [1.85-7.78], p\u2009<\u2009.001, respectively). However, brain metastasis (BM) at initial diagnosis or intracranial progression during gefitinib treatment had no impact on OS (1.266 [0.83-1.93], p\u2009=\u2009.275 and 0.75 [0.48-1.19], p\u2009=\u2009.211, respectively).\nCONCLUSION: HCV infection, performance status (ECOG \u22652), newly diagnosed advanced NSCLC without prior operation, and liver metastasis predicted poor OS in EGFR mutation-positive advanced NSCLC patients treated with first-line gefitinib; however, neither BM at initial diagnosis nor intracranial progression during gefitinib treatment had an impact on OS. The Oncologist 2017;22:1-9 IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: The finding that chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection might predict poor overall survival (OS) in epidermal growth factor receptor mutation-positive advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients treated with first-line gefitinib may raise awareness of benefit from anti-HCV treatment in this patient population. Brain metastasis in the initial diagnosis or intracranial progression during gefitinib treatment is not a prognostic factor for OS. This study, which enrolled a real-world population of NSCLC patients, including sicker patients who were not eligible for a clinical trial, may have impact on guiding usual clinical practice."]]
["agac_task3_149", ["Novel loss of function mutation in KRIT1/CCM1 is associated with distinctly progressive cerebral and spinal cavernous malformations after radiochemotherapy for intracranial malignant germ cell tumor.\nPURPOSE: Cerebrospinal cavernous malformations (CCMs) are vascular lesions characterized by dilated and leaky capillary caverns. CCMs can cause seizures, focal neurological deficits or acute intracranial hemorrhage; however, most patients are asymptomatic. CCMs occur either sporadically or as a familial autosomal-dominant disorder. We present a clinical and molecular study of a patient with distinctive cerebral and spinal cavernous malformations following radiochemotherapy for a malignant brain tumor.\nMETHODS: The patient had multiple magnet resonance imaging (MRI) examinations of his brain and spine following radiochemotherapy for a primary intracranial germ cell tumor (GCT), as part of his oncologic follow-up. The MRI sequences included susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI). The coding exons and their flanking intronic regions of KRIT1/CCM1 gene were analyzed for mutations by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and direct sequencing.\nRESULTS: MRI revealed numerous cerebral and spinal microhemorrhages and pronounced cavernous malformations that progressed with subsequent follow-up imaging. Genetic analysis demonstrated a novel heterozygous KRIT1/CCM1 two base pair deletion (c.1535_1536delTG) in exon 14. This deletion leads to a frameshift with a premature stop codon at nucleotide position 1553 and a highly likely loss of function of the KRIT1 protein.\nCONCLUSION: We describe a patient with a novel heterozygous germ line loss of function mutation in KRIT1, which is associated with rapid-onset and highly progressive CCMs after radiochemotherapy for a malignant brain tumor."]]
["agac_task3_150", ["TREM2 deficiency impairs chemotaxis and microglial responses to neuronal injury.\nSequence variations in the triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2) have been linked to an increased risk for neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease and frontotemporal lobar degeneration. In the brain, TREM2 is predominantly expressed in microglia. Several disease-associated TREM2 variants result in a loss of function by reducing microglial phagocytosis, impairing lipid sensing, preventing binding of lipoproteins and affecting shielding of amyloid plaques. We here investigate the consequences of TREM2 loss of function on the microglia transcriptome. Among the differentially expressed messenger RNAs in wild-type and Trem2(-/-) microglia, gene clusters are identified which represent gene functions in chemotaxis, migration and mobility. Functional analyses confirm that loss of TREM2 impairs appropriate microglial responses to injury and signals that normally evoke chemotaxis on multiple levels. In an ex vivo organotypic brain slice assay, absence of TREM2 reduces the distance migrated by microglia. Moreover, migration towards defined chemo-attractants is reduced upon ablation of TREM2 and can be rescued by TREM2 re-expression. In vivo, microglia lacking TREM2 migrate less towards injected apoptotic neurons, and outgrowth of microglial processes towards sites of laser-induced focal CNS damage in the somatosensory cortex is slowed. The apparent lack of chemotactic stimulation upon depletion of TREM2 is consistent with a stable expression profile of genes characterizing the homoeostatic signature of microglia.", "TREM2 deficiency impairs chemotaxis and microglial responses to neuronal injury.\nSequence variations in the triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2) have been linked to an increased risk for neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease and frontotemporal lobar degeneration. In the brain, TREM2 is predominantly expressed in microglia. Several disease-associated TREM2 variants result in a loss of function by reducing microglial phagocytosis, impairing lipid sensing, preventing binding of lipoproteins and affecting shielding of amyloid plaques. We here investigate the consequences of TREM2 loss of function on the microglia transcriptome. Among the differentially expressed messenger RNAs in wild-type and Trem2(-/-) microglia, gene clusters are identified which represent gene functions in chemotaxis, migration and mobility. Functional analyses confirm that loss of TREM2 impairs appropriate microglial responses to injury and signals that normally evoke chemotaxis on multiple levels. In an ex vivo organotypic brain slice assay, absence of TREM2 reduces the distance migrated by microglia. Moreover, migration towards defined chemo-attractants is reduced upon ablation of TREM2 and can be rescued by TREM2 re-expression. In vivo, microglia lacking TREM2 migrate less towards injected apoptotic neurons, and outgrowth of microglial processes towards sites of laser-induced focal CNS damage in the somatosensory cortex is slowed. The apparent lack of chemotactic stimulation upon depletion of TREM2 is consistent with a stable expression profile of genes characterizing the homoeostatic signature of microglia."]]
["agac_task3_151", ["New gain-of-function mutation shows CACNA1D as recurrently mutated gene in autism spectrum disorders and epilepsy.\nCACNA1D encodes the pore-forming \u03b11-subunit of Cav1.3, an L-type voltage-gated Ca2+-channel. Despite the recent discovery of two de novo missense gain-of-function mutations in Cav1.3 in two individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and intellectual disability CACNA1D has not been considered a prominent ASD-risk gene in large scale genetic analyses, since such studies primarly focus on likely-disruptive genetic variants. Here we report the discovery and characterization of a third de novo missense mutation in CACNA1D (V401L) in a patient with ASD and epilepsy.For the functional characterization we introduced mutation V401L into two major C-terminal long and short Cav1.3 splice variants, expressed wild-type or mutant channel complexes in tsA-201 cells and performed whole-cell patch-clamp recordings.Mutation V401L, localized within the channel's activation gate, significantly enhanced current densities, shifted voltage dependence of activation and inactivation to more negative voltages and reduced channel inactivation in both Cav1.3 splice variants. Altogether these gating changes are expected to result in enhanced Ca2+-influx through the channel, thus representing a strong gain-of-function phenotype. Additionally, we also found that mutant channels retained full sensitivity towards the clinically available Ca2+ -channel blocker isradipine.Our findings strengthen the evidence for CACNA1D as a novel candidate autism risk gene and encourage experimental therapy with available channel-blockers for this mutation. The additional presence of seizures and neurological abnormalities in our patient define a novel phenotype partially overlapping with symptoms in two individuals with PASNA (congential primary aldosteronism, seizures and neurological abnormalities) caused by similar Cav1.3 gain-of-function mutations.", "New gain-of-function mutation shows CACNA1D as recurrently mutated gene in autism spectrum disorders and epilepsy.\nCACNA1D encodes the pore-forming \u03b11-subunit of Cav1.3, an L-type voltage-gated Ca2+-channel. Despite the recent discovery of two de novo missense gain-of-function mutations in Cav1.3 in two individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and intellectual disability CACNA1D has not been considered a prominent ASD-risk gene in large scale genetic analyses, since such studies primarly focus on likely-disruptive genetic variants. Here we report the discovery and characterization of a third de novo missense mutation in CACNA1D (V401L) in a patient with ASD and epilepsy.For the functional characterization we introduced mutation V401L into two major C-terminal long and short Cav1.3 splice variants, expressed wild-type or mutant channel complexes in tsA-201 cells and performed whole-cell patch-clamp recordings.Mutation V401L, localized within the channel's activation gate, significantly enhanced current densities, shifted voltage dependence of activation and inactivation to more negative voltages and reduced channel inactivation in both Cav1.3 splice variants. Altogether these gating changes are expected to result in enhanced Ca2+-influx through the channel, thus representing a strong gain-of-function phenotype. Additionally, we also found that mutant channels retained full sensitivity towards the clinically available Ca2+ -channel blocker isradipine.Our findings strengthen the evidence for CACNA1D as a novel candidate autism risk gene and encourage experimental therapy with available channel-blockers for this mutation. The additional presence of seizures and neurological abnormalities in our patient define a novel phenotype partially overlapping with symptoms in two individuals with PASNA (congential primary aldosteronism, seizures and neurological abnormalities) caused by similar Cav1.3 gain-of-function mutations."]]
["agac_task3_152", ["Hydrocephalus due to multiple ependymal malformations is caused by mutations in the MPDZ gene.\nCongenital hydrocephalus is considered as either acquired due to haemorrhage, infection or neoplasia or as of developmental nature and is divided into two subgroups, communicating and obstructive. Congenital hydrocephalus is either syndromic or non-syndromic, and in the latter no cause is found in more than half of the patients. In patients with isolated hydrocephalus, L1CAM mutations represent the most common aetiology. More recently, a founder mutation has also been reported in the MPDZ gene in foetuses presenting massive hydrocephalus, but the neuropathology remains unknown. We describe here three novel homozygous null mutations in the MPDZ gene in foetuses whose post-mortem examination has revealed a homogeneous phenotype characterized by multiple ependymal malformations along the aqueduct of Sylvius, the third and fourth ventricles as well as the central canal of the medulla, consisting in multifocal rosettes with immature cell accumulation in the vicinity of ependymal lining early detached from the ventricular zone. MPDZ also named MUPP1 is an essential component of tight junctions which are expressed from early brain development in the choroid plexuses and ependyma. Alterations in the formation of tight junctions within the ependyma very likely account for the lesions observed and highlight for the first time that primary multifocal ependymal malformations of the ventricular system is genetically determined in humans. Therefore, MPDZ sequencing should be performed when neuropathological examination reveals multifocal ependymal rosette formation within the aqueduct of Sylvius, of the third and fourth ventricles and of the central canal of the medulla."]]
["agac_task3_153", ["Hydrocephalus due to multiple ependymal malformations is caused by mutations in the MPDZ gene.\nCongenital hydrocephalus is considered as either acquired due to haemorrhage, infection or neoplasia or as of developmental nature and is divided into two subgroups, communicating and obstructive. Congenital hydrocephalus is either syndromic or non-syndromic, and in the latter no cause is found in more than half of the patients. In patients with isolated hydrocephalus, L1CAM mutations represent the most common aetiology. More recently, a founder mutation has also been reported in the MPDZ gene in foetuses presenting massive hydrocephalus, but the neuropathology remains unknown. We describe here three novel homozygous null mutations in the MPDZ gene in foetuses whose post-mortem examination has revealed a homogeneous phenotype characterized by multiple ependymal malformations along the aqueduct of Sylvius, the third and fourth ventricles as well as the central canal of the medulla, consisting in multifocal rosettes with immature cell accumulation in the vicinity of ependymal lining early detached from the ventricular zone. MPDZ also named MUPP1 is an essential component of tight junctions which are expressed from early brain development in the choroid plexuses and ependyma. Alterations in the formation of tight junctions within the ependyma very likely account for the lesions observed and highlight for the first time that primary multifocal ependymal malformations of the ventricular system is genetically determined in humans. Therefore, MPDZ sequencing should be performed when neuropathological examination reveals multifocal ependymal rosette formation within the aqueduct of Sylvius, of the third and fourth ventricles and of the central canal of the medulla."]]
["agac_task3_154", ["Identification and characterization of a novel DGAT1 missense mutation associated with congenital diarrhea.\nAcyl-CoA:diacylglycerol acyltransferase (DGAT)1 and DGAT2 catalyze triglyceride (TG) biosynthesis in humans. Biallelic loss-of-function mutations in human DGAT1 result in severe congenital diarrhea and protein-losing enteropathy. Additionally, pharmacologic inhibition of DGAT1 led to dose-related diarrhea in human clinical trials. Here we identify a previously unknown DGAT1 mutation in identical twins of South Asian descent. These male patients developed watery diarrhea shortly after birth, with protein-losing enteropathy and failure to thrive. Exome sequencing revealed a homozygous recessive mutation in DGAT1, c.314T>C, p.L105P. We show here that the p.L105P DGAT1 enzyme produced from the mutant allele is less abundant, resulting in partial loss of TG synthesis activity and decreased formation of lipid droplets in patient-derived primary dermal fibroblasts. Thus, in contrast with complete loss-of-function alleles of DGAT1, the p.L105P missense allele partially reduces TG synthesis activity and causes a less severe clinical phenotype. Our findings add to the growing recognition of DGAT1 deficiency as a cause of congenital diarrhea with protein-losing enteropathy and indicate that DGAT1 mutations result in a spectrum of diseases.", "Identification and characterization of a novel DGAT1 missense mutation associated with congenital diarrhea.\nAcyl-CoA:diacylglycerol acyltransferase (DGAT)1 and DGAT2 catalyze triglyceride (TG) biosynthesis in humans. Biallelic loss-of-function mutations in human DGAT1 result in severe congenital diarrhea and protein-losing enteropathy. Additionally, pharmacologic inhibition of DGAT1 led to dose-related diarrhea in human clinical trials. Here we identify a previously unknown DGAT1 mutation in identical twins of South Asian descent. These male patients developed watery diarrhea shortly after birth, with protein-losing enteropathy and failure to thrive. Exome sequencing revealed a homozygous recessive mutation in DGAT1, c.314T>C, p.L105P. We show here that the p.L105P DGAT1 enzyme produced from the mutant allele is less abundant, resulting in partial loss of TG synthesis activity and decreased formation of lipid droplets in patient-derived primary dermal fibroblasts. Thus, in contrast with complete loss-of-function alleles of DGAT1, the p.L105P missense allele partially reduces TG synthesis activity and causes a less severe clinical phenotype. Our findings add to the growing recognition of DGAT1 deficiency as a cause of congenital diarrhea with protein-losing enteropathy and indicate that DGAT1 mutations result in a spectrum of diseases."]]
["agac_task3_155", ["ATR Mutations Promote the Growth of Melanoma Tumors by Modulating the Immune Microenvironment.\nMelanomas accumulate a high burden of mutations that could potentially generate neoantigens, yet somehow suppress the immune response to facilitate continued growth. In this study, we identify a subset of human melanomas that have loss-of-function mutations in ATR, a kinase that recognizes and repairs UV-induced DNA damage and is required for cellular proliferation. ATR mutant tumors exhibit both the accumulation of multiple mutations and the altered expression of inflammatory genes, resulting in decreased T\u00a0cell recruitment and increased recruitment of macrophages known to spur tumor invasion. Taken together, these studies identify a mechanism by which melanoma cells modulate the immune microenvironment to promote continued growth."]]
["agac_task3_156", ["MAX inactivation is an early event in GIST development that regulates p16 and cell proliferation.\nKIT, PDGFRA, NF1 and SDH mutations are alternate initiating events, fostering hyperplasia in gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GISTs), and additional genetic alterations are required for progression to malignancy. The most frequent secondary alteration, demonstrated in \u223c70% of GISTs, is chromosome 14q deletion. Here we report hemizygous or homozygous inactivating mutations of the chromosome 14q MAX gene in 16 of 76 GISTs (21%). We find MAX mutations in 17% and 50% of sporadic and NF1-syndromic GISTs, respectively, and we find loss of MAX protein expression in 48% and 90% of sporadic and NF1-syndromic GISTs, respectively, and in three of eight micro-GISTs, which are early GISTs. MAX genomic inactivation is associated with p16 silencing in the absence of p16 coding sequence deletion and MAX induction restores p16 expression and inhibits GIST proliferation. Hence, MAX inactivation is a common event in GIST progression, fostering cell cycle activity in early GISTs."]]
["agac_task3_157", ["MAX inactivation is an early event in GIST development that regulates p16 and cell proliferation.\nKIT, PDGFRA, NF1 and SDH mutations are alternate initiating events, fostering hyperplasia in gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GISTs), and additional genetic alterations are required for progression to malignancy. The most frequent secondary alteration, demonstrated in \u223c70% of GISTs, is chromosome 14q deletion. Here we report hemizygous or homozygous inactivating mutations of the chromosome 14q MAX gene in 16 of 76 GISTs (21%). We find MAX mutations in 17% and 50% of sporadic and NF1-syndromic GISTs, respectively, and we find loss of MAX protein expression in 48% and 90% of sporadic and NF1-syndromic GISTs, respectively, and in three of eight micro-GISTs, which are early GISTs. MAX genomic inactivation is associated with p16 silencing in the absence of p16 coding sequence deletion and MAX induction restores p16 expression and inhibits GIST proliferation. Hence, MAX inactivation is a common event in GIST progression, fostering cell cycle activity in early GISTs."]]
["agac_task3_158", ["MAX inactivation is an early event in GIST development that regulates p16 and cell proliferation.\nKIT, PDGFRA, NF1 and SDH mutations are alternate initiating events, fostering hyperplasia in gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GISTs), and additional genetic alterations are required for progression to malignancy. The most frequent secondary alteration, demonstrated in \u223c70% of GISTs, is chromosome 14q deletion. Here we report hemizygous or homozygous inactivating mutations of the chromosome 14q MAX gene in 16 of 76 GISTs (21%). We find MAX mutations in 17% and 50% of sporadic and NF1-syndromic GISTs, respectively, and we find loss of MAX protein expression in 48% and 90% of sporadic and NF1-syndromic GISTs, respectively, and in three of eight micro-GISTs, which are early GISTs. MAX genomic inactivation is associated with p16 silencing in the absence of p16 coding sequence deletion and MAX induction restores p16 expression and inhibits GIST proliferation. Hence, MAX inactivation is a common event in GIST progression, fostering cell cycle activity in early GISTs."]]
["agac_task3_159", ["MAX inactivation is an early event in GIST development that regulates p16 and cell proliferation.\nKIT, PDGFRA, NF1 and SDH mutations are alternate initiating events, fostering hyperplasia in gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GISTs), and additional genetic alterations are required for progression to malignancy. The most frequent secondary alteration, demonstrated in \u223c70% of GISTs, is chromosome 14q deletion. Here we report hemizygous or homozygous inactivating mutations of the chromosome 14q MAX gene in 16 of 76 GISTs (21%). We find MAX mutations in 17% and 50% of sporadic and NF1-syndromic GISTs, respectively, and we find loss of MAX protein expression in 48% and 90% of sporadic and NF1-syndromic GISTs, respectively, and in three of eight micro-GISTs, which are early GISTs. MAX genomic inactivation is associated with p16 silencing in the absence of p16 coding sequence deletion and MAX induction restores p16 expression and inhibits GIST proliferation. Hence, MAX inactivation is a common event in GIST progression, fostering cell cycle activity in early GISTs."]]
["agac_task3_160", ["Conformational disruption of PI3K\u03b4 regulation by immunodeficiency mutations in PIK3CD and PIK3R1.\nActivated PI3K Delta Syndrome (APDS) is a primary immunodeficiency disease caused by activating mutations in either the leukocyte-restricted p110\u03b4 catalytic (PIK3CD) subunit or the ubiquitously expressed p85\u03b1 regulatory (PIK3R1) subunit of class IA phosphoinositide 3-kinases (PI3Ks). There are two classes of APDS: APDS1 that arises from p110\u03b4 mutations that are analogous to oncogenic mutations found in the broadly expressed p110\u03b1 subunit and APDS2 that occurs from a splice mutation resulting in p85\u03b1 with a central deletion (\u0394434-475). As p85 regulatory subunits associate with and inhibit all class IA catalytic subunits, APDS2 mutations are expected to similarly activate p110\u03b1, \u03b2, and \u03b4, yet APDS2 largely phenocopies APDS1 without dramatic effects outside the immune system. We have examined the molecular mechanism of activation of both classes of APDS mutations using a combination of biochemical assays and hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry. Intriguingly, we find that an APDS2 mutation in p85\u03b1 leads to substantial basal activation of p110\u03b4 (>300-fold) and disrupts inhibitory interactions from the nSH2, iSH2, and cSH2 domains of p85, whereas p110\u03b1 is only minimally basally activated (\u223c2-fold) when associated with mutated p85\u03b1. APDS1 mutations in p110\u03b4 (N334K, E525K, E1021K) mimic the activation mechanisms previously discovered for oncogenic mutations in p110\u03b1. All APDS mutations were potently inhibited by the Food and Drug Administration-approved p110\u03b4 inhibitor idelalisib. Our results define the molecular basis of how PIK3CD and PIK3R1 mutations result in APDS and reveal a potential path to treatment for all APDS patients."]]
["agac_task3_161", ["Single copy/knock-in models of ALS SOD1 in C. elegans suggest loss and gain of function have different contributions to cholinergic and glutamatergic neurodegeneration.\nMutations in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) lead to Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS), a neurodegenerative disease that disproportionately affects glutamatergic and cholinergic motor neurons. Previous work with SOD1 overexpression models supports a role for SOD1 toxic gain of function in ALS pathogenesis. However, the impact of SOD1 loss of function in ALS cannot be directly examined in overexpression models. In addition, overexpression may obscure the contribution of SOD1 loss of function in the degeneration of different neuronal populations. Here, we report the first single-copy, ALS knock-in models in C. elegans generated by transposon- or CRISPR/Cas9- mediated genome editing of the endogenous sod-1 gene. Introduction of ALS patient amino acid changes A4V, H71Y, L84V, G85R or G93A into the C. elegans sod-1 gene yielded single-copy/knock-in ALS SOD1 models. These differ from previously reported overexpression models in multiple assays. In single-copy/knock-in models, we observed differential impact of sod-1 ALS alleles on glutamatergic and cholinergic neurodegeneration. A4V, H71Y, G85R, and G93A animals showed increased SOD1 protein accumulation and oxidative stress induced degeneration, consistent with a toxic gain of function in cholinergic motor neurons. By contrast, H71Y, L84V, and G85R lead to glutamatergic neuron degeneration due to sod-1 loss of function after oxidative stress. However, dopaminergic and serotonergic neuronal populations were spared in single-copy ALS models, suggesting a neuronal-subtype specificity previously not reported in invertebrate ALS SOD1 models. Combined, these results suggest that knock-in models may reproduce the neurotransmitter-type specificity of ALS and that both SOD1 loss and gain of toxic function differentially contribute to ALS pathogenesis in different neuronal populations."]]
["bb_train_0", [" [CLS] Salmonellae detection in egg products [CLS] .\nOf the 104 isolations of Salmonella sp. from egg pulp, 97 were obtained from strontium chloride M broth, 42 from strontium selenite broth and 57 from strontium selenite A", " [CLS] Salmonellae detection in egg [CLS]  products.\nOf the 104 isolations of Salmonella sp. from egg pulp, 97 were obtained from strontium chloride M broth, 42 from strontium selenite broth and 57 from strontium selenite"]]
["bb_train_1", [" [CLS] Salmonella sp. from egg pulp, 97 were obtained from strontium chloride M broth, 42 from strontium selenite broth and 57 from strontium selenite A broth [CLS] . The results suggest that the first medium may be used more successfully than bi-selenite based media for enrichment and subsequent detection of salmonellae in egg products; however, the growth", " [CLS] Salmonella sp. from egg pulp [CLS] , 97 were obtained from strontium chloride M broth, 42 from strontium selenite broth and 57 from strontium selenite A broth. The results suggest that the first medium may be", " [CLS] Salmonella sp. from egg pulp, 97 were obtained from strontium chloride M broth [CLS] , 42 from strontium selenite broth and 57 from strontium selenite A broth. The results suggest that the first medium may be used more successfully than bi-selenite based media for", " [CLS] Salmonella sp. from egg pulp, 97 were obtained from strontium chloride M broth, 42 from strontium selenite broth [CLS]  and 57 from strontium selenite A broth. The results suggest that the first medium may be used more successfully than bi-selenite based media for enrichment and subsequent detection of", " serovar Typhimurium in chickens.\nIn this study, a Salmonella Typhimurium lytic bacteriophage, \u03a6 st1, which was isolated from chicken faecal material, was evaluated as a candidate for biocontrol of  [CLS] Salmonella in chickens [CLS] . The morphology of \u03a6 st1 showed strong resemblance to members of the Siphoviridae family. \u03a6 st1 was observed to be a DNA phage with an estimated genome size of", " \u00b0C (6.4 log\u2081\u2080 CFU/ml) and 42 \u00b0C (6.0 log\u2081\u2080 CFU/ml). The in vivo study using \u03a6 st1 showed that intracloacal inoculation of ~10\u00b9\u00b2 PFU/ml of the phage in the  [CLS] chickens challenged with ~10\u00b9\u2070 CFU/ml of S. Typhimurium was able to reduce (P<0.05) the S. Typhimurium more rapidly than the untreated group. The Salmonella [CLS]  count reduced to 2.9 log\u2081\u2080 CFU/ml within 6h of post-challenge and S. Typhimurium was not detected at and after 24h of post-challenge. Reduction of Salmonella count in visceral organs", " the untreated group. The Salmonella count reduced to 2.9 log\u2081\u2080 CFU/ml within 6h of post-challenge and S. Typhimurium was not detected at and after 24h of post-challenge. Reduction of  [CLS] Salmonella count in visceral organs [CLS]  was also observed at 6h post-challenge. Approximately 1.6 log\u2081\u2080 FU/ml \u03a6 st1 was found to persist in the caecal wall of the chicks at 72 h of post-challenge. The", " the untreated group. The Salmonella count reduced to 2.9 log\u2081\u2080 CFU/ml within 6h of post-challenge and S. Typhimurium was not detected at and after 24h of post-challenge. Reduction of  [CLS] Salmonella count in visceral organs was also observed at 6h post-challenge. Approximately 1.6 log\u2081\u2080 FU/ml \u03a6 st1 was found to persist in the caecal wall of the chicks [CLS]  at 72 h of post-challenge. The present study indicated that \u03a6 st1 may serve as a potential biocontrol agent to reduce the Salmonella count in caecal content of chickens.", " the untreated group. The Salmonella count reduced to 2.9 log\u2081\u2080 CFU/ml within 6h of post-challenge and S. Typhimurium was not detected at and after 24h of post-challenge. Reduction of  [CLS] Salmonella count in visceral organs was also observed at 6h post-challenge. Approximately 1.6 log\u2081\u2080 FU/ml \u03a6 st1 was found to persist in the caecal wall of the chicks [CLS]  at 72 h of post-challenge. The present study indicated that \u03a6 st1 may serve as a potential biocontrol agent to reduce the Salmonella count in caecal content of chickens.", " in the caecal wall of the chicks at 72 h of post-challenge. The present study indicated that \u03a6 st1 may serve as a potential biocontrol agent to reduce the  [CLS] Salmonella count in caecal content of chickens [CLS] .\n\n", " in the caecal wall of the chicks at 72 h of post-challenge. The present study indicated that \u03a6 st1 may serve as a potential biocontrol agent to reduce the  [CLS] Salmonella count in caecal content of chickens [CLS] .\n\n"]]
["bb_train_2", [" and 57 from strontium selenite A broth. The results suggest that the first medium may be used more successfully than bi-selenite based media for enrichment and subsequent detection of  [CLS] salmonellae in egg [CLS]  products; however, the growth of S. pullorum was not satisfactory in strontium chloride M broth.\n\n", " and 57 from strontium selenite A broth. The results suggest that the first medium may be used more successfully than bi-selenite based media for enrichment and subsequent detection of  [CLS] salmonellae in egg products [CLS] ; however, the growth of S. pullorum was not satisfactory in strontium chloride M broth.\n\n"]]
["bb_train_3", [" [CLS] glycoprotein-binding activity in Streptococcus pyogenes [CLS]  regulated by the mga gene.\nThe interaction between Streptococcus pyogenes and the host cell surface is not completely understood. Characterization of the adhesion mechanisms of the bacterium to the", " [CLS] Streptococcus pyogenes and the host cell surface is not completely understood. Characterization of the adhesion mechanisms [CLS]  of the bacterium to the host cell surface is needed in order to develop new vaccines and anti-adhesion drugs. The presence of glycoprotein-binding activities among streptococcal strains was investigated."]]
["bb_train_4", [" the bacterium to the host cell surface is needed in order to develop new vaccines and anti-adhesion drugs. The presence of glycoprotein-binding activities among streptococcal strains was investigated. An  [CLS] activity binding to thyroglobulin, fetuin, asialofetuin and mucin but not non-glycosylated proteins was found to be present in the majority of the S. pyogenes [CLS]  strains studied. Cross-inhibition experiments suggested that the glycoproteins share a common structure recognized by the bacteria. The glycoprotein-binding activity was found to be proteinaceous, tightly attached to the bacterial", " the bacterium to the host cell surface is needed in order to develop new vaccines and anti-adhesion drugs. The presence of glycoprotein-binding activities among streptococcal strains was investigated. An  [CLS] activity binding to thyroglobulin, fetuin, asialofetuin and mucin but not non-glycosylated proteins was found to be present in the majority of the S. pyogenes [CLS]  strains studied. Cross-inhibition experiments suggested that the glycoproteins share a common structure recognized by the bacteria. The glycoprotein-binding activity was found to be proteinaceous, tightly attached to the bacterial", " the bacterium to the host cell surface is needed in order to develop new vaccines and anti-adhesion drugs. The presence of glycoprotein-binding activities among streptococcal strains was investigated. An  [CLS] activity binding to thyroglobulin, fetuin, asialofetuin and mucin but not non-glycosylated proteins was found to be present in the majority of the S. pyogenes [CLS]  strains studied. Cross-inhibition experiments suggested that the glycoproteins share a common structure recognized by the bacteria. The glycoprotein-binding activity was found to be proteinaceous, tightly attached to the bacterial", " the bacterium to the host cell surface is needed in order to develop new vaccines and anti-adhesion drugs. The presence of glycoprotein-binding activities among streptococcal strains was investigated. An  [CLS] activity binding to thyroglobulin, fetuin, asialofetuin and mucin but not non-glycosylated proteins was found to be present in the majority of the S. pyogenes [CLS]  strains studied. Cross-inhibition experiments suggested that the glycoproteins share a common structure recognized by the bacteria. The glycoprotein-binding activity was found to be proteinaceous, tightly attached to the bacterial", " surfaces coated with glycoproteins. The activity was found by transposon mutagenesis and complementation to be regulated by the multiple-gene regulator Mga, which has been implicated as a regulator of  [CLS] S. pyogenes virulence [CLS]  factors.\n\n"]]
["bb_train_5", [" [CLS] Staphylococcus aureus strains colonizing patients [CLS]  in a nursing home.\nTo assist in defining patterns of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) colonization in a skilled nursing facility (SNF), we compared genotyping by field-inversion gel electrophoresis (FIGE)", " [CLS] Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) colonization in a skilled nursing facility [CLS]  (SNF), we compared genotyping by field-inversion gel electrophoresis (FIGE) restriction endonuclease digestion analysis (REA) with phenotyping by antibiogram for defining strain relatedness among MRSA isolates from SNF patients.\nProspective", " [CLS] Biomaterial-associated infection, mostly caused by Staphylococcus epidermidis and Staphylococcus aureus [CLS] , is fairly complicated by the organism' development of a biofilm, which provides a microenvironment that protects from attack by the host immune system and antibiotics. In this review we", " treatment of Staphylococcus biofilms.\nStaphylococcus growth on medical devices represents a common occurrence that can lead to serious illness and death. Biomaterial-associated infection, mostly caused by Staphylococcus epidermidis and  [CLS] Staphylococcus aureus, is fairly complicated by the organism' development of a biofilm [CLS] , which provides a microenvironment that protects from attack by the host immune system and antibiotics. In this review we present recent insights regarding S. aureus and S. epidermidis structural", " [CLS] Staphylococcus aureus including MRSA on environmental surfaces in a jail [CLS]  setting.\nWe examined jail environmental surfaces to explore whether they might serve as reservoirs of viable methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). We swabbed 132 surfaces, inoculated primary and secondary mannitol", " [CLS] Staphylococcus aureus including MRSA on environmental surfaces in a jail setting [CLS] .\nWe examined jail environmental surfaces to explore whether they might serve as reservoirs of viable methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). We swabbed 132 surfaces, inoculated primary and secondary mannitol salts", " mammals, hemoglobin (Hb) represents the largest reservoir of iron, and pathogens express Hb-binding proteins to access this source. Here, we show how one of the commonest and most significant  [CLS] human pathogens, Staphylococcus aureus [CLS] , captures Hb as the first step of an iron-scavenging pathway. The x-ray crystal structure of Hb bound to a domain from the Isd (iron-regulated surface determinant) protein, IsdH, is", " [CLS] Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) or vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE). Time to clearance of colonization has important implications for patient [CLS]  care and infection control policy.\nWe performed parallel searches in OVID Medline for studies that reported the time to documented clearance of MRSA and VRE colonization in the absence"]]
["bb_train_6", [" [CLS] methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus [CLS]  strains colonizing patients in a nursing home.\nTo assist in defining patterns of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) colonization in a skilled nursing facility (SNF), we compared genotyping by field-inversion", " [CLS] methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus [CLS]  (MRSA) colonization in a skilled nursing facility (SNF), we compared genotyping by field-inversion gel electrophoresis (FIGE) restriction endonuclease digestion analysis (REA) with phenotyping by antibiogram for defining strain relatedness", " treatment of Staphylococcus biofilms.\nStaphylococcus growth on medical devices represents a common occurrence that can lead to serious illness and death. Biomaterial-associated infection, mostly caused by Staphylococcus epidermidis and  [CLS] Staphylococcus aureus, is fairly complicated by the organism' development of a biofilm [CLS] , which provides a microenvironment that protects from attack by the host immune system and antibiotics. In this review we present recent insights regarding S. aureus and S. epidermidis structural", " fluid (CSF) collected from patients diagnosed with bacterial meningitis by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). In addition to Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae described previously, five other  [CLS] pathogens, Neisseria meningitidis, Escherichia coli, Streptococcus agalactiae, Staphylococcus aureus [CLS] , and Listeria monocytogenes, were targeted, based on a large-scale surveillance in Japan. Results in CSF from neonates and children (n=150), and from adults (n=18) analyzed by real-time PCR with", " [CLS] methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus [CLS]  (MRSA). We swabbed 132 surfaces, inoculated primary and secondary mannitol salts and oxacillin-resistant screening agar, and used API tests to identify S. aureus and E-tests to determine methicillin/oxacillin resistance.", " mammals, hemoglobin (Hb) represents the largest reservoir of iron, and pathogens express Hb-binding proteins to access this source. Here, we show how one of the commonest and most significant  [CLS] human pathogens, Staphylococcus aureus [CLS] , captures Hb as the first step of an iron-scavenging pathway. The x-ray crystal structure of Hb bound to a domain from the Isd (iron-regulated surface determinant) protein, IsdH, is", " [CLS] methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus [CLS]  (MRSA) and vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE): a systematic review.\nNo published systematic reviews have assessed the natural history of colonization with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) or vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE). Time", " [CLS] methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus [CLS]  (MRSA) or vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE). Time to clearance of colonization has important implications for patient care and infection control policy.\nWe performed parallel searches in OVID Medline for studies"]]
["bb_train_7", [" colonization in a skilled nursing facility (SNF), we compared genotyping by field-inversion gel electrophoresis (FIGE) restriction endonuclease digestion analysis (REA) with phenotyping by antibiogram for defining strain relatedness among  [CLS] MRSA isolates from SNF patients [CLS] .\nProspective screening culture surveillance for MRSA among patients in a community SNF.\nNares and stool swab cultures were obtained from newly admitted patients and from all patients quarterly. MRSA", " by field-inversion gel electrophoresis (FIGE) restriction endonuclease digestion analysis (REA) with phenotyping by antibiogram for defining strain relatedness among MRSA isolates from SNF patients.\nProspective screening culture surveillance for  [CLS] MRSA among patients [CLS]  in a community SNF.\nNares and stool swab cultures were obtained from newly admitted patients and from all patients quarterly. MRSA were isolated by oxacillin screening agar. Antibiograms were", " digestion analysis (REA) with phenotyping by antibiogram for defining strain relatedness among MRSA isolates from SNF patients.\nProspective screening culture surveillance for MRSA among patients in a community SNF.\n [CLS] Nares and stool swab cultures were obtained from newly admitted patients and from all patients quarterly. MRSA [CLS]  were isolated by oxacillin screening agar. Antibiograms were determined by the disk-diffusion method, and genotyping was by FIGE REA.\nIt was shown that, among isolates with the same genotypes,", " (REA) with phenotyping by antibiogram for defining strain relatedness among MRSA isolates from SNF patients.\nProspective screening culture surveillance for MRSA among patients in a community SNF.\nNares and  [CLS] stool swab cultures were obtained from newly admitted patients and from all patients quarterly. MRSA [CLS]  were isolated by oxacillin screening agar. Antibiograms were determined by the disk-diffusion method, and genotyping was by FIGE REA.\nIt was shown that, among isolates with the same genotypes,", " patients.\nProspective screening culture surveillance for MRSA among patients in a community SNF.\nNares and stool swab cultures were obtained from newly admitted patients and from all patients quarterly.  [CLS] MRSA were isolated by oxacillin screening agar [CLS] . Antibiograms were determined by the disk-diffusion method, and genotyping was by FIGE REA.\nIt was shown that, among isolates with the same genotypes, many had different antibiograms; among isolates", " digestion analysis (REA) with phenotyping by antibiogram for defining strain relatedness among MRSA isolates from SNF patients.\nProspective screening culture surveillance for MRSA among patients in a community SNF.\n [CLS] Nares and stool swab cultures were obtained from newly admitted patients and from all patients quarterly. MRSA [CLS]  were isolated by oxacillin screening agar. Antibiograms were determined by the disk-diffusion method, and genotyping was by FIGE REA.\nIt was shown that, among isolates with the same genotypes,", " (REA) with phenotyping by antibiogram for defining strain relatedness among MRSA isolates from SNF patients.\nProspective screening culture surveillance for MRSA among patients in a community SNF.\nNares and  [CLS] stool swab cultures were obtained from newly admitted patients and from all patients quarterly. MRSA [CLS]  were isolated by oxacillin screening agar. Antibiograms were determined by the disk-diffusion method, and genotyping was by FIGE REA.\nIt was shown that, among isolates with the same genotypes,", " variability of REA DNA type within each antibiogram pattern. The discriminatory index of antibiograms alone, or of genotypes alone as determined by FIGE REA, was poor for strains of  [CLS] MRSA isolated from the SNF patients [CLS]  in our study.\n\n", " [CLS] MRSA on environmental surfaces in a jail setting [CLS] .\nWe examined jail environmental surfaces to explore whether they might serve as reservoirs of viable methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). We swabbed 132 surfaces, inoculated primary and secondary mannitol salts", " [CLS] MRSA on environmental surfaces in a jail [CLS]  setting.\nWe examined jail environmental surfaces to explore whether they might serve as reservoirs of viable methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). We swabbed 132 surfaces, inoculated primary and secondary mannitol", " oxacillin-resistant screening agar, and used API tests to identify S. aureus and E-tests to determine methicillin/oxacillin resistance. We recovered S. aureus from 10 (7.6%) surfaces; eight (6.1%) isolates were  [CLS] MRSA. We ran pulsed-field gel electrophoresis on six resistant isolates and observed three patterns, one of which was identical to that identified in a previous study of inmates' nasal [CLS]  specimens. Finding MRSA-contaminated surfaces on a variety of environmental surfaces in the absence of an overt outbreak emphasizes that correctional facilities should have protocols for environmental cleaning as a", " [CLS] jail environmental surfaces to explore whether they might serve as reservoirs of viable methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). We swabbed 132 surfaces, inoculated primary and secondary mannitol salts and oxacillin-resistant screening agar, and used API tests to identify S. aureus and E-tests to determine methicillin/oxacillin resistance. We recovered S. aureus from 10 (7.6%) surfaces; eight (6.1%) isolates were MRSA [CLS] . We ran pulsed-field gel electrophoresis on six resistant isolates and observed three patterns, one of which was identical to that identified in a previous study of inmates' nasal specimens.", " surfaces in a jail setting.\nWe examined jail environmental surfaces to explore whether they might serve as reservoirs of viable methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). We swabbed 132 surfaces, inoculated  [CLS] primary and secondary mannitol salts and oxacillin-resistant screening agar, and used API tests to identify S. aureus and E-tests to determine methicillin/oxacillin resistance. We recovered S. aureus from 10 (7.6%) surfaces; eight (6.1%) isolates were MRSA [CLS] . We ran pulsed-field gel electrophoresis on six resistant isolates and observed three patterns, one of which was identical to that identified in a previous study of inmates' nasal specimens.", " examined jail environmental surfaces to explore whether they might serve as reservoirs of viable methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). We swabbed 132 surfaces, inoculated primary and secondary mannitol salts and  [CLS] oxacillin-resistant screening agar, and used API tests to identify S. aureus and E-tests to determine methicillin/oxacillin resistance. We recovered S. aureus from 10 (7.6%) surfaces; eight (6.1%) isolates were MRSA [CLS] . We ran pulsed-field gel electrophoresis on six resistant isolates and observed three patterns, one of which was identical to that identified in a previous study of inmates' nasal specimens.", " oxacillin-resistant screening agar, and used API tests to identify S. aureus and E-tests to determine methicillin/oxacillin resistance. We recovered S. aureus from 10 (7.6%) surfaces; eight (6.1%) isolates were  [CLS] MRSA. We ran pulsed-field gel electrophoresis on six resistant isolates and observed three patterns, one of which was identical to that identified in a previous study of inmates [CLS] ' nasal specimens. Finding MRSA-contaminated surfaces on a variety of environmental surfaces in the absence of an overt outbreak emphasizes that correctional facilities should have protocols for environmental cleaning as", " [CLS] jail environmental surfaces to explore whether they might serve as reservoirs of viable methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). We swabbed 132 surfaces, inoculated primary and secondary mannitol salts and oxacillin-resistant screening agar, and used API tests to identify S. aureus and E-tests to determine methicillin/oxacillin resistance. We recovered S. aureus from 10 (7.6%) surfaces; eight (6.1%) isolates were MRSA [CLS] . We ran pulsed-field gel electrophoresis on six resistant isolates and observed three patterns, one of which was identical to that identified in a previous study of inmates' nasal specimens.", " ran pulsed-field gel electrophoresis on six resistant isolates and observed three patterns, one of which was identical to that identified in a previous study of inmates' nasal specimens. Finding  [CLS] MRSA-contaminated surfaces on a variety of environmental surfaces in the absence of an overt outbreak emphasizes that correctional facilities [CLS]  should have protocols for environmental cleaning as a component of MRSA prevention.\n\n", " to that identified in a previous study of inmates' nasal specimens. Finding MRSA-contaminated surfaces on a variety of environmental surfaces in the absence of an overt outbreak emphasizes that  [CLS] correctional facilities should have protocols for environmental cleaning as a component of MRSA [CLS]  prevention.\n\n", " total follow-up was 38 weeks for MRSA and 25 weeks for VRE. Based on pooled analyses, the model-estimated median time to clearance was 88 weeks after documented colonization for  [CLS] MRSA-colonized patients [CLS]  and 26 weeks for VRE-colonized patients. In a secondary analysis, clearance rates for MRSA and VRE were compared by restricting the duration of follow-up for the MRSA studies to"]]
["bb_train_8", [" colonization in a skilled nursing facility (SNF), we compared genotyping by field-inversion gel electrophoresis (FIGE) restriction endonuclease digestion analysis (REA) with phenotyping by antibiogram for defining strain relatedness among  [CLS] MRSA [CLS]  isolates from SNF patients.\nProspective screening culture surveillance for MRSA among patients in a community SNF.\nNares and stool swab cultures were obtained from newly admitted patients and from", " by field-inversion gel electrophoresis (FIGE) restriction endonuclease digestion analysis (REA) with phenotyping by antibiogram for defining strain relatedness among MRSA isolates from SNF patients.\nProspective screening culture surveillance for  [CLS] MRSA [CLS]  among patients in a community SNF.\nNares and stool swab cultures were obtained from newly admitted patients and from all patients quarterly. MRSA were isolated by oxacillin screening agar.", " patients.\nProspective screening culture surveillance for MRSA among patients in a community SNF.\nNares and stool swab cultures were obtained from newly admitted patients and from all patients quarterly.  [CLS] MRSA [CLS]  were isolated by oxacillin screening agar. Antibiograms were determined by the disk-diffusion method, and genotyping was by FIGE REA.\nIt was shown that, among isolates with the same genotypes,", " shown that, among isolates with the same genotypes, many had different antibiograms; among isolates with the same antibiograms, many had different genotypes; and the discriminatory indices for isolates of  [CLS] MRSA [CLS]  by FIGE REA and by antibiogram were 0.56 and 0.78, respectively.\nOur study demonstrated that, in patients from one SNF, genotyping by FIGE REA identified two prevalent REA DNA", " variability of REA DNA type within each antibiogram pattern. The discriminatory index of antibiograms alone, or of genotypes alone as determined by FIGE REA, was poor for strains of  [CLS] MRSA [CLS]  isolated from the SNF patients in our study.\n\n", " [CLS] MRSA [CLS]  on environmental surfaces in a jail setting.\nWe examined jail environmental surfaces to explore whether they might serve as reservoirs of viable methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). We swabbed 132", " Staphylococcus aureus including MRSA on environmental surfaces in a jail setting.\nWe examined jail environmental surfaces to explore whether they might serve as reservoirs of viable methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus ( [CLS] MRSA [CLS] ). We swabbed 132 surfaces, inoculated primary and secondary mannitol salts and oxacillin-resistant screening agar, and used API tests to identify S. aureus and E-tests to determine methicillin/oxacillin resistance. We", " oxacillin-resistant screening agar, and used API tests to identify S. aureus and E-tests to determine methicillin/oxacillin resistance. We recovered S. aureus from 10 (7.6%) surfaces; eight (6.1%) isolates were  [CLS] MRSA [CLS] . We ran pulsed-field gel electrophoresis on six resistant isolates and observed three patterns, one of which was identical to that identified in a previous study of inmates' nasal specimens.", " ran pulsed-field gel electrophoresis on six resistant isolates and observed three patterns, one of which was identical to that identified in a previous study of inmates' nasal specimens. Finding  [CLS] MRSA [CLS] -contaminated surfaces on a variety of environmental surfaces in the absence of an overt outbreak emphasizes that correctional facilities should have protocols for environmental cleaning as a component of MRSA", " MRSA-contaminated surfaces on a variety of environmental surfaces in the absence of an overt outbreak emphasizes that correctional facilities should have protocols for environmental cleaning as a component of  [CLS] MRSA [CLS]  prevention.\n\n", " [CLS] MRSA [CLS] ) and vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE): a systematic review.\nNo published systematic reviews have assessed the natural history of colonization with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) or vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE). Time to", " of colonization with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE): a systematic review.\nNo published systematic reviews have assessed the natural history of colonization with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus ( [CLS] MRSA [CLS] ) or vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE). Time to clearance of colonization has important implications for patient care and infection control policy.\nWe performed parallel searches in OVID Medline for studies that", " of colonization has important implications for patient care and infection control policy.\nWe performed parallel searches in OVID Medline for studies that reported the time to documented clearance of  [CLS] MRSA [CLS]  and VRE colonization in the absence of treatment, published between January 1990 and July 2012.\nFor MRSA, we screened 982 articles, identified 16 eligible studies (13 observational studies and", " OVID Medline for studies that reported the time to documented clearance of MRSA and VRE colonization in the absence of treatment, published between January 1990 and July 2012.\nFor  [CLS] MRSA [CLS] , we screened 982 articles, identified 16 eligible studies (13 observational studies and 3 randomized controlled trials), for a total of 1,804 non-duplicated subjects. For VRE, we screened 284 articles,", " reported time of initial colonization. Studies varied in the frequency of sampling, assays used for sampling, and follow-up period. The median duration of total follow-up was 38 weeks for  [CLS] MRSA [CLS]  and 25 weeks for VRE. Based on pooled analyses, the model-estimated median time to clearance was 88 weeks after documented colonization for MRSA-colonized patients and 26 weeks for VRE-colonized", " total follow-up was 38 weeks for MRSA and 25 weeks for VRE. Based on pooled analyses, the model-estimated median time to clearance was 88 weeks after documented colonization for  [CLS] MRSA [CLS] -colonized patients and 26 weeks for VRE-colonized patients. In a secondary analysis, clearance rates for MRSA and VRE were compared by restricting the duration of follow-up for the MRSA studies", " analyses, the model-estimated median time to clearance was 88 weeks after documented colonization for MRSA-colonized patients and 26 weeks for VRE-colonized patients. In a secondary analysis, clearance rates for  [CLS] MRSA [CLS]  and VRE were compared by restricting the duration of follow-up for the MRSA studies to the maximum observed time point for VRE studies (43 weeks). With this restriction, the", " for MRSA-colonized patients and 26 weeks for VRE-colonized patients. In a secondary analysis, clearance rates for MRSA and VRE were compared by restricting the duration of follow-up for the  [CLS] MRSA [CLS]  studies to the maximum observed time point for VRE studies (43 weeks). With this restriction, the model-fitted median time to documented clearance for MRSA would occur at 41 weeks", " duration of follow-up for the MRSA studies to the maximum observed time point for VRE studies (43 weeks). With this restriction, the model-fitted median time to documented clearance for  [CLS] MRSA [CLS]  would occur at 41 weeks after documented colonization, demonstrating the sensitivity of the pooled estimate to length of study follow-up.\nFew available studies report the natural history of MRSA", " MRSA would occur at 41 weeks after documented colonization, demonstrating the sensitivity of the pooled estimate to length of study follow-up.\nFew available studies report the natural history of  [CLS] MRSA [CLS]  and VRE colonization. Lack of a consistent definition of clearance, uncertainty regarding the time of initial colonization, variation in frequency of sampling for persistent colonization, assays employed and variation"]]
["bb_train_9", [" of Ralstonia eutropha H850 were investigated by measuring fluorescence polarization using 1,6-diphenyl-1,3,5-hexatriene (DPH) as the probe, and determining the cellular fatty acid compositions. TeCB significantly affected the membrane of  [CLS] R. eutropha H850 cells grown on fructose by decreasing DPH fluorescence polarization. In contrast, the membrane of cells grown on biphenyl [CLS]  showed a considerably less significant effect of TeCB on membrane polarization than in fructose-grown cells. An increase in the ratio of total saturated to unsaturated fatty acids in cells", " of Ralstonia eutropha H850 were investigated by measuring fluorescence polarization using 1,6-diphenyl-1,3,5-hexatriene (DPH) as the probe, and determining the cellular fatty acid compositions. TeCB significantly affected the membrane of  [CLS] R. eutropha H850 cells grown on fructose by decreasing DPH fluorescence polarization. In contrast, the membrane of cells grown on biphenyl showed a considerably less significant effect of TeCB on membrane polarization than in fructose-grown cells. An increase in the ratio of total saturated to unsaturated fatty acids in cells grown on biphenyl [CLS]  suggested less of a fluidizing effect of TeCB on membranes in those cells. When biphenyl-grown cells were transferred back to a fructose medium, they required 25 generations for the", " of Ralstonia eutropha H850 were investigated by measuring fluorescence polarization using 1,6-diphenyl-1,3,5-hexatriene (DPH) as the probe, and determining the cellular fatty acid compositions. TeCB significantly affected the membrane of  [CLS] R. eutropha H850 cells grown on fructose by decreasing DPH fluorescence polarization. In contrast, the membrane of cells grown on biphenyl showed a considerably less significant effect of TeCB on membrane polarization than in fructose-grown cells. An increase in the ratio of total saturated to unsaturated fatty acids in cells grown on biphenyl suggested less of a fluidizing effect of TeCB on membranes in those cells. When biphenyl-grown cells were transferred back to a fructose medium [CLS] , they required 25 generations for the membrane polarization and fatty acid compositions of these cells to revert back to those of the initial fructose-grown cells. The re-adaptation to a", " of Ralstonia eutropha H850 were investigated by measuring fluorescence polarization using 1,6-diphenyl-1,3,5-hexatriene (DPH) as the probe, and determining the cellular fatty acid compositions. TeCB significantly affected the membrane of  [CLS] R. eutropha H850 cells grown on fructose by decreasing DPH fluorescence polarization. In contrast, the membrane of cells grown on biphenyl showed a considerably less significant effect of TeCB on membrane polarization than in fructose-grown cells. An increase in the ratio of total saturated to unsaturated fatty acids in cells grown on biphenyl suggested less of a fluidizing effect of TeCB on membranes in those cells. When biphenyl-grown cells were transferred back to a fructose medium, they required 25 generations for the membrane polarization and fatty acid compositions of these cells to revert back to those of the initial fructose [CLS] -grown cells. The re-adaptation to a change in temperature required only five generations to return to normal. These results show that biphenyl affects cells in more ways than simply fluidizing", " of Ralstonia eutropha H850 were investigated by measuring fluorescence polarization using 1,6-diphenyl-1,3,5-hexatriene (DPH) as the probe, and determining the cellular fatty acid compositions. TeCB significantly affected the membrane of  [CLS] R. eutropha H850 cells grown on fructose by decreasing DPH fluorescence polarization. In contrast, the membrane of cells grown on biphenyl showed a considerably less significant effect of TeCB on membrane polarization than in fructose [CLS] -grown cells. An increase in the ratio of total saturated to unsaturated fatty acids in cells grown on biphenyl suggested less of a fluidizing effect of TeCB on membranes in", " of Ralstonia eutropha H850 were investigated by measuring fluorescence polarization using 1,6-diphenyl-1,3,5-hexatriene (DPH) as the probe, and determining the cellular fatty acid compositions. TeCB significantly affected the membrane of  [CLS] R. eutropha H850 cells grown on fructose [CLS]  by decreasing DPH fluorescence polarization. In contrast, the membrane of cells grown on biphenyl showed a considerably less significant effect of TeCB on membrane polarization than in fructose-grown cells.", " of Ralstonia eutropha H850 were investigated by measuring fluorescence polarization using 1,6-diphenyl-1,3,5-hexatriene (DPH) as the probe, and determining the cellular fatty acid compositions. TeCB significantly affected the membrane of  [CLS] R. eutropha H850 cells grown on fructose by decreasing DPH fluorescence polarization. In contrast, the membrane of cells grown on biphenyl showed a considerably less significant effect of TeCB on membrane polarization than in fructose-grown cells. An increase in the ratio of total saturated to unsaturated fatty acids in cells grown on biphenyl suggested less of a fluidizing effect of TeCB on membranes in those cells. When biphenyl [CLS] -grown cells were transferred back to a fructose medium, they required 25 generations for the membrane polarization and fatty acid compositions of these cells to revert back to those of"]]
["bb_train_10", [" heterologously in different host systems. Full-length HOX polypeptide was produced in Escherichia coli, but no HOX activity could be detected. In contrast, active HOX could be produced in the  [CLS] methylotrophic yeast Pichia pastoris [CLS] . Several growth physiological and genetic approaches for optimization of hexose oxidase production in P. pastoris were investigated. Our results indicate that specific growth conditions are essential in order to"]]
["bb_train_11", [" [CLS] nitrogen-fixing cyanobacterium Anabaena sp. strain L-31 [CLS] .\nCompared to Escherichia coli, the nitrogen-fixing soil cyanobacterium Anabaena sp. strain L-31 exhibited significantly superior abilities to survive prolonged and continuous heat stress and recover therefrom. Temperature upshift induced", " [CLS] thermotolerance of the nitrogen-fixing cyanobacterium Anabaena sp. strain L-31 [CLS] .\nCompared to Escherichia coli, the nitrogen-fixing soil cyanobacterium Anabaena sp. strain L-31 exhibited significantly superior abilities to survive prolonged and continuous heat stress and recover therefrom. Temperature upshift induced", " [CLS] Anabaena sp. strain L-31 exhibited significantly superior abilities to survive prolonged and continuous heat stress [CLS]  and recover therefrom. Temperature upshift induced the synthesis of heat-shock proteins of similar molecular mass in the two microbes. However, in Anabaena sp. strain L-31 the heat-shock proteins (particularly", " [CLS] nitrogen-fixing soil cyanobacterium Anabaena sp. strain L-31 [CLS]  exhibited significantly superior abilities to survive prolonged and continuous heat stress and recover therefrom. Temperature upshift induced the synthesis of heat-shock proteins of similar molecular mass in the two"]]
["bb_train_12", [" [CLS] soil cyanobacterium Anabaena sp. strain L-31 [CLS]  exhibited significantly superior abilities to survive prolonged and continuous heat stress and recover therefrom. Temperature upshift induced the synthesis of heat-shock proteins of similar molecular mass in the two"]]
["bb_train_13", [" stress period, were much more stable and accumulated during heat stress. In contrast, in E. coli the heat-shock proteins were transiently synthesised, quickly turned over and did not accumulate.  [CLS] Nitrogenase activity of Anabaena cells of sp. strain L-31 [CLS]  continuously exposed to heat stress for 7 days rapidly recovered from thermal injury, although growth recovery was delayed. Exposure of E. coli cells to >4.5 h of heat stress", " during heat stress. In contrast, in E. coli the heat-shock proteins were transiently synthesised, quickly turned over and did not accumulate. Nitrogenase activity of Anabaena cells of sp. strain  [CLS] L-31 continuously exposed to heat stress for 7 days rapidly recovered from thermal injury, although growth recovery was delayed. Exposure of E. coli cells to >4.5 h of heat stress resulted in a complete loss of viability and the ability to recover. Marked differences in the synthesis, stability and accumulation of heat-shock proteins appear to distinguish these bacteria in their thermotolerance [CLS]  and recovery from heat stress.\n\n"]]
["bb_train_14", ["\nPost-translational glycosylation is a universal modification of proteins in eukarya, archaea and bacteria. Two recent publications describe the first confirmed report of a bacterial N-linked glycosylation pathway in the  [CLS] human gastrointestinal pathogen Campylobacter jejuni [CLS] . In addition, an O-linked glycosylation pathway has been identified and characterized in C. jejuni and the related species Campylobacter coli. Both pathways have similarity to the respective N- and", "\nPost-translational glycosylation is a universal modification of proteins in eukarya, archaea and bacteria. Two recent publications describe the first confirmed report of a bacterial N-linked glycosylation pathway in the  [CLS] human gastrointestinal pathogen Campylobacter jejuni [CLS] . In addition, an O-linked glycosylation pathway has been identified and characterized in C. jejuni and the related species Campylobacter coli. Both pathways have similarity to the respective N- and"]]
["bb_train_15", ["\nPost-translational glycosylation is a universal modification of proteins in eukarya, archaea and bacteria. Two recent publications describe the first confirmed report of a bacterial N-linked glycosylation pathway in the  [CLS] human gastrointestinal pathogen Campylobacter jejuni [CLS] . In addition, an O-linked glycosylation pathway has been identified and characterized in C. jejuni and the related species Campylobacter coli. Both pathways have similarity to the respective N- and"]]
["bb_train_16", ["\nAgars are important gelifying agents for biochemical use and the food industry. To cleave the beta-1,4-linkages between beta-d-galactose and alpha-l-3,6-anhydro-galactose residues in the red algal galactans known as agars,  [CLS] marine bacteria produce polysaccharide hydrolases called beta-agarases. Beta-agarases A and B from Zobellia galactanivorans Dsij [CLS]  have recently been biochemically characterized. Here we report the first crystal structure of these two beta-agarases. The two proteins were overproduced in Escherichia coli and crystallized, and the crystal"]]
["bb_train_17", [" [CLS] Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria depends on a type III secretion (TTS) system which translocates bacterial effector proteins into the plant [CLS]  cell. Previous transcriptome analysis identified a genome-wide regulon of putative virulence genes that are coexpressed with the TTS system. In this study, we characterized two of these genes, xopC", " [CLS] plant pathogen Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria [CLS]  depends on a type III secretion (TTS) system which translocates bacterial effector proteins into the plant cell. Previous transcriptome analysis identified a genome-wide regulon of putative virulence genes that"]]
["bb_train_18", [" [CLS] gram-negative plant pathogen Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria [CLS]  depends on a type III secretion (TTS) system which translocates bacterial effector proteins into the plant cell. Previous transcriptome analysis identified a genome-wide regulon of putative virulence genes that", " [CLS] plant pathogen Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria [CLS]  depends on a type III secretion (TTS) system which translocates bacterial effector proteins into the plant cell. Previous transcriptome analysis identified a genome-wide regulon of putative virulence genes that", " [CLS] Pathogenicity of the gram-negative plant pathogen Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria [CLS]  depends on a type III secretion (TTS) system which translocates bacterial effector proteins into the plant cell. Previous transcriptome analysis identified a genome-wide regulon of putative virulence genes that"]]
["bb_train_19", [" [CLS] Escherichia coli O157:H7 grown in tryptic soy broth and nutrient broth to apple and lettuce surfaces [CLS]  as related to cell hydrophobicity, surface charge, and capsule production.\nThis study investigated the effect of growth in tryptic soy broth (TSB) and nutrient broth (NB) on the ability", " [CLS] Escherichia coli O157:H7 grown in tryptic soy broth and nutrient broth to apple and lettuce [CLS]  surfaces as related to cell hydrophobicity, surface charge, and capsule production.\nThis study investigated the effect of growth in tryptic soy broth (TSB) and nutrient broth (NB) on the", " [CLS] Escherichia coli O157:H7 grown in tryptic soy broth and nutrient broth to apple [CLS]  and lettuce surfaces as related to cell hydrophobicity, surface charge, and capsule production.\nThis study investigated the effect of growth in tryptic soy broth (TSB) and nutrient broth (NB)", " [CLS] Escherichia coli O157:H7 grown in tryptic soy broth and nutrient broth to apple and lettuce surfaces [CLS]  as related to cell hydrophobicity, surface charge, and capsule production.\nThis study investigated the effect of growth in tryptic soy broth (TSB) and nutrient broth (NB) on the ability", " [CLS] Escherichia coli O157:H7 grown in tryptic soy broth and nutrient broth [CLS]  to apple and lettuce surfaces as related to cell hydrophobicity, surface charge, and capsule production.\nThis study investigated the effect of growth in tryptic soy broth (TSB) and nutrient", " [CLS] Escherichia coli O157:H7 grown in tryptic soy broth [CLS]  and nutrient broth to apple and lettuce surfaces as related to cell hydrophobicity, surface charge, and capsule production.\nThis study investigated the effect of growth in tryptic soy broth", " as related to cell hydrophobicity, surface charge, and capsule production.\nThis study investigated the effect of growth in tryptic soy broth (TSB) and nutrient broth (NB) on the ability  [CLS] Escherichia coli O157:H7 to attach to lettuce and apple surfaces [CLS] . In addition, cell surface hydrophobicity, charge and capsule production were determined on cells grown in these media. Cells grown in NB attached less to lettuce and apple surfaces than", " and nutrient broth to apple and lettuce surfaces as related to cell hydrophobicity, surface charge, and capsule production.\nThis study investigated the effect of growth in tryptic soy broth ( [CLS] TSB) and nutrient broth (NB) on the ability Escherichia coli O157:H7 [CLS]  to attach to lettuce and apple surfaces. In addition, cell surface hydrophobicity, charge and capsule production were determined on cells grown in these media. Cells grown in NB attached", " as related to cell hydrophobicity, surface charge, and capsule production.\nThis study investigated the effect of growth in tryptic soy broth (TSB) and nutrient broth (NB) on the ability  [CLS] Escherichia coli O157:H7 to attach to lettuce and apple surfaces [CLS] . In addition, cell surface hydrophobicity, charge and capsule production were determined on cells grown in these media. Cells grown in NB attached less to lettuce and apple surfaces than", " as related to cell hydrophobicity, surface charge, and capsule production.\nThis study investigated the effect of growth in tryptic soy broth (TSB) and nutrient broth (NB) on the ability  [CLS] Escherichia coli O157:H7 to attach to lettuce and apple surfaces. In addition, cell surface hydrophobicity, charge and capsule production were determined on cells grown in these media. Cells grown in NB attached less to lettuce and apple surfaces [CLS]  than did those grown in TSB. TSB, but not NB, supported capsule production by E. coli O157:H7. Cells grown in TSB were more hydrophilic than those grown in NB.", " apple and lettuce surfaces as related to cell hydrophobicity, surface charge, and capsule production.\nThis study investigated the effect of growth in tryptic soy broth (TSB) and nutrient broth ( [CLS] NB) on the ability Escherichia coli O157:H7 [CLS]  to attach to lettuce and apple surfaces. In addition, cell surface hydrophobicity, charge and capsule production were determined on cells grown in these media. Cells grown in NB attached", " broth to apple and lettuce surfaces as related to cell hydrophobicity, surface charge, and capsule production.\nThis study investigated the effect of growth in tryptic soy broth (TSB) and  [CLS] nutrient broth (NB) on the ability Escherichia coli O157:H7 [CLS]  to attach to lettuce and apple surfaces. In addition, cell surface hydrophobicity, charge and capsule production were determined on cells grown in these media. Cells grown in NB attached", " as related to cell hydrophobicity, surface charge, and capsule production.\nThis study investigated the effect of growth in tryptic soy broth (TSB) and nutrient broth (NB) on the ability  [CLS] Escherichia coli O157:H7 to attach to lettuce and apple surfaces. In addition, cell surface hydrophobicity, charge and capsule production were determined on cells grown in these media. Cells grown in NB attached less to lettuce [CLS]  and apple surfaces than did those grown in TSB. TSB, but not NB, supported capsule production by E. coli O157:H7. Cells grown in TSB were more hydrophilic than those", " as related to cell hydrophobicity, surface charge, and capsule production.\nThis study investigated the effect of growth in tryptic soy broth (TSB) and nutrient broth (NB) on the ability  [CLS] Escherichia coli O157:H7 to attach to lettuce and apple surfaces. In addition, cell surface hydrophobicity, charge and capsule production were determined on cells grown in these media. Cells grown in NB attached less to lettuce and apple surfaces [CLS]  than did those grown in TSB. TSB, but not NB, supported capsule production by E. coli O157:H7. Cells grown in TSB were more hydrophilic than those grown in NB.", " as related to cell hydrophobicity, surface charge, and capsule production.\nThis study investigated the effect of growth in tryptic soy broth (TSB) and nutrient broth (NB) on the ability  [CLS] Escherichia coli O157:H7 to attach to lettuce [CLS]  and apple surfaces. In addition, cell surface hydrophobicity, charge and capsule production were determined on cells grown in these media. Cells grown in NB attached less to lettuce and", " as related to cell hydrophobicity, surface charge, and capsule production.\nThis study investigated the effect of growth in tryptic soy broth (TSB) and nutrient broth (NB) on the ability  [CLS] Escherichia coli O157:H7 to attach to lettuce and apple surfaces. In addition, cell surface hydrophobicity, charge and capsule production were determined on cells grown in these media. Cells grown in NB attached less to lettuce and apple [CLS]  surfaces than did those grown in TSB. TSB, but not NB, supported capsule production by E. coli O157:H7. Cells grown in TSB were more hydrophilic than those grown in", " as related to cell hydrophobicity, surface charge, and capsule production.\nThis study investigated the effect of growth in tryptic soy broth (TSB) and nutrient broth (NB) on the ability  [CLS] Escherichia coli O157:H7 to attach to lettuce and apple surfaces. In addition, cell surface hydrophobicity, charge and capsule production were determined on cells grown in these media. Cells grown in NB [CLS]  attached less to lettuce and apple surfaces than did those grown in TSB. TSB, but not NB, supported capsule production by E. coli O157:H7. Cells grown in TSB were", " as related to cell hydrophobicity, surface charge, and capsule production.\nThis study investigated the effect of growth in tryptic soy broth (TSB) and nutrient broth (NB) on the ability  [CLS] Escherichia coli O157:H7 to attach to lettuce and apple surfaces. In addition, cell surface hydrophobicity, charge and capsule production were determined on cells grown in these media. Cells grown in NB attached less to lettuce and apple surfaces than did those grown in TSB [CLS] . TSB, but not NB, supported capsule production by E. coli O157:H7. Cells grown in TSB were more hydrophilic than those grown in NB. No difference was found in the", " as related to cell hydrophobicity, surface charge, and capsule production.\nThis study investigated the effect of growth in tryptic soy broth (TSB) and nutrient broth (NB) on the ability  [CLS] Escherichia coli O157:H7 to attach to lettuce and apple [CLS]  surfaces. In addition, cell surface hydrophobicity, charge and capsule production were determined on cells grown in these media. Cells grown in NB attached less to lettuce and apple surfaces", " tryptic soy broth and nutrient broth to apple and lettuce surfaces as related to cell hydrophobicity, surface charge, and capsule production.\nThis study investigated the effect of growth in  [CLS] tryptic soy broth (TSB) and nutrient broth (NB) on the ability Escherichia coli O157:H7 [CLS]  to attach to lettuce and apple surfaces. In addition, cell surface hydrophobicity, charge and capsule production were determined on cells grown in these media. Cells grown in NB attached", " [CLS] food pathogen Escherichia coli O157:H7 [CLS]  were investigated under extreme incubation conditions. The 28-mer analog K4K20S4 (P28) displayed an MIC of 8 microM and rapid bactericidal kinetics under standard culture conditions. Potent bactericidal properties were"]]
["bb_train_20", [" [CLS] Attachment of Escherichia coli O157:H7 [CLS]  grown in tryptic soy broth and nutrient broth to apple and lettuce surfaces as related to cell hydrophobicity, surface charge, and capsule production.\nThis study investigated the effect of", " [CLS] pathogen Escherichia coli O157:H7 [CLS]  were investigated under extreme incubation conditions. The 28-mer analog K4K20S4 (P28) displayed an MIC of 8 microM and rapid bactericidal kinetics under standard culture conditions. Potent bactericidal properties were"]]
["bb_train_21", [" grown in these media. Cells grown in NB attached less to lettuce and apple surfaces than did those grown in TSB. TSB, but not NB, supported capsule production by  [CLS] E. coli O157:H7. Cells grown in TSB were more hydrophilic than those grown in NB [CLS] . No difference was found in the electrokinetic properties of cells grown in these media. Electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions and surface proteins did not appear to play an important role", " production were determined on cells grown in these media. Cells grown in NB attached less to lettuce and apple surfaces than did those grown in TSB. TSB, but not  [CLS] NB, supported capsule production by E. coli O157:H7 [CLS] . Cells grown in TSB were more hydrophilic than those grown in NB. No difference was found in the electrokinetic properties of cells grown in these media. Electrostatic and hydrophobic", " charge and capsule production were determined on cells grown in these media. Cells grown in NB attached less to lettuce and apple surfaces than did those grown in TSB.  [CLS] TSB, but not NB, supported capsule production by E. coli O157:H7 [CLS] . Cells grown in TSB were more hydrophilic than those grown in NB. No difference was found in the electrokinetic properties of cells grown in these media. Electrostatic and hydrophobic", " grown in these media. Cells grown in NB attached less to lettuce and apple surfaces than did those grown in TSB. TSB, but not NB, supported capsule production by  [CLS] E. coli O157:H7. Cells grown in TSB [CLS]  were more hydrophilic than those grown in NB. No difference was found in the electrokinetic properties of cells grown in these media. Electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions and surface proteins"]]
["bb_train_22", [" determined on cells grown in these media. Cells grown in NB attached less to lettuce and apple surfaces than did those grown in TSB. TSB, but not NB, supported  [CLS] capsule production by E. coli O157:H7 [CLS] . Cells grown in TSB were more hydrophilic than those grown in NB. No difference was found in the electrokinetic properties of cells grown in these media. Electrostatic and hydrophobic", " in the electrokinetic properties of cells grown in these media. Electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions and surface proteins did not appear to play an important role in the attachment of  [CLS] E. coli O157:H7 to these surfaces. Of the factors studied, only capsule production was associated with attachment ability [CLS] .\n\n", " was found in the electrokinetic properties of cells grown in these media. Electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions and surface proteins did not appear to play an important role in the  [CLS] attachment of E. coli O157:H7 [CLS]  to these surfaces. Of the factors studied, only capsule production was associated with attachment ability.\n\n", " in the electrokinetic properties of cells grown in these media. Electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions and surface proteins did not appear to play an important role in the attachment of  [CLS] E. coli O157:H7 to these surfaces. Of the factors studied, only capsule production [CLS]  was associated with attachment ability.\n\n"]]
["bb_train_23", [" [CLS] Escherichia coli adhesion in vitro on Caco-2 cells and ex vivo on pigs' jejunal tissue [CLS] .\nThe ability of Lactobacillus (Lb.) gasseri K 7 to inhibit adhesion of Escherichia coli O8:K88 to intestinal mucosa was studied on cultured Caco-2 cells and ex vivo on pigs'", " [CLS] Escherichia coli adhesion in vitro on Caco-2 cells [CLS]  and ex vivo on pigs' jejunal tissue.\nThe ability of Lactobacillus (Lb.) gasseri K 7 to inhibit adhesion of Escherichia coli O8:K88 to intestinal mucosa was studied on cultured", " [CLS] Escherichia coli exploit type III secretion to inject \"effector proteins\" into human [CLS]  cells, which then subvert eukaryotic cell biology to the bacterium's advantage. We have exploited bioinformatics and experimental approaches to establish that the effector repertoire in the Sakai strain of", " [CLS] Escherichia coli mastitis in cattle [CLS] .\nIn 12 healthy cows, neutrophil alkaline phosphatase (NAP) activity was measured by flow cytometer before and during an experimentally induced Escherichia coli mastitis, to study the role and increase", " [CLS] healthy cows, neutrophil alkaline phosphatase (NAP) activity was measured by flow cytometer before and during an experimentally induced Escherichia coli [CLS]  mastitis, to study the role and increase of NAP in Gram-negative bacterial infections. Percentage of neutrophils containing alkaline phosphatase and intensity of NAP activity were measured. Preinfection percentage of"]]
["bb_train_24", [" [CLS] Escherichia coli adhesion [CLS]  in vitro on Caco-2 cells and ex vivo on pigs' jejunal tissue.\nThe ability of Lactobacillus (Lb.) gasseri K 7 to inhibit adhesion of Escherichia coli O8:K88 to intestinal", " [CLS] pathogenic strains of Escherichia coli [CLS]  exploit type III secretion to inject \"effector proteins\" into human cells, which then subvert eukaryotic cell biology to the bacterium's advantage. We have exploited bioinformatics and experimental approaches to", " [CLS] Escherichia coli exploit type III secretion [CLS]  to inject \"effector proteins\" into human cells, which then subvert eukaryotic cell biology to the bacterium's advantage. We have exploited bioinformatics and experimental approaches to establish that the effector", " fluid (CSF) collected from patients diagnosed with bacterial meningitis by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). In addition to Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae described previously, five other  [CLS] pathogens, Neisseria meningitidis, Escherichia coli [CLS] , Streptococcus agalactiae, Staphylococcus aureus, and Listeria monocytogenes, were targeted, based on a large-scale surveillance in Japan. Results in CSF from neonates and children (n=150), and from adults (n=18) analyzed", " initiation of an induced Escherichia coli mastitis in cattle.\nIn 12 healthy cows, neutrophil alkaline phosphatase (NAP) activity was measured by flow cytometer before and during an experimentally induced  [CLS] Escherichia coli mastitis, to study the role and increase of NAP in Gram-negative [CLS]  bacterial infections. Percentage of neutrophils containing alkaline phosphatase and intensity of NAP activity were measured. Preinfection percentage of neutrophils with enzyme activity varied between 64.0% and 84.4% and the"]]
["bb_train_25", [" to inhibit Escherichia coli adhesion in vitro on Caco-2 cells and ex vivo on pigs' jejunal tissue.\nThe ability of Lactobacillus (Lb.) gasseri K 7 to inhibit adhesion of  [CLS] Escherichia coli O8:K88 to intestinal [CLS]  mucosa was studied on cultured Caco-2 cells and ex vivo on pigs' small intestinal tissue. Lactobacilli were added simultaneously with E. coli, before E. coli and after E. coli", " to inhibit Escherichia coli adhesion in vitro on Caco-2 cells and ex vivo on pigs' jejunal tissue.\nThe ability of Lactobacillus (Lb.) gasseri K 7 to inhibit adhesion of  [CLS] Escherichia coli O8:K88 to intestinal mucosa [CLS]  was studied on cultured Caco-2 cells and ex vivo on pigs' small intestinal tissue. Lactobacilli were added simultaneously with E. coli, before E. coli and after E. coli for"]]
["bb_train_26", [" K 7 to inhibit Escherichia coli adhesion in vitro on Caco-2 cells and ex vivo on pigs' jejunal tissue.\nThe ability of Lactobacillus (Lb.) gasseri K 7 to inhibit  [CLS] adhesion of Escherichia coli O8:K88 [CLS]  to intestinal mucosa was studied on cultured Caco-2 cells and ex vivo on pigs' small intestinal tissue. Lactobacilli were added simultaneously with E. coli, before E. coli and after"]]
["bb_train_27", [" vivo on pigs' small intestinal tissue. Lactobacilli were added simultaneously with E. coli, before E. coli and after E. coli for competition, exclusion and displacement assays. The concentration of  [CLS] lactobacilli on fully differentiated Caco-2 cells [CLS]  was 4.5+/-0.3 x 10(8) cfu/well, while the concentration of E. coli varied from 1.5 x 10(6) to 4.3 x 10(8) cfu/well. The number of E. coli adhered to Caco-2", " x 10(6) and 1.54+/-0.10 x 10(6) cfu/cm(2)) when the concentrations of single strains in suspensions were approximately the same. No significant competition, exclusion or displacement of E. coli by  [CLS] lactobacilli was observed on jejunal tissue [CLS] . In conclusion, Lb. gasseri K 7 was found to be effective in reducing E. coli adhesion to Caco-2 enterocytes, but it was not able to do so in ex"]]
["bb_train_28", [" pigs' small intestinal tissue. Lactobacilli were added simultaneously with E. coli, before E. coli and after E. coli for competition, exclusion and displacement assays. The concentration of lactobacilli on  [CLS] fully differentiated Caco-2 cells was 4.5+/-0.3 x 10(8) cfu/well, while the concentration of E. coli [CLS]  varied from 1.5 x 10(6) to 4.3 x 10(8) cfu/well. The number of E. coli adhered to Caco-2 monolayer (cfu/well) was lineary correlated (R(2)=0.97) to the concentration of added", " on fully differentiated Caco-2 cells was 4.5+/-0.3 x 10(8) cfu/well, while the concentration of E. coli varied from 1.5 x 10(6) to 4.3 x 10(8) cfu/well. The number of  [CLS] E. coli adhered to Caco-2 [CLS]  monolayer (cfu/well) was lineary correlated (R(2)=0.97) to the concentration of added cells. In the assay simulating exclusion, E. coli adhesion was reduced by Lb. gasseri K 7 strain by", " more when incubated simultaneously with lactobacilli, particularly at the lowest concentration of E. coli (ratio E. coli/lactobacilli 1:248), where five-times reduction (or 0.7 log) was observed. When adhesion to  [CLS] tissue derived from pigs' jejunum was tested, concentration of E. coli [CLS]  was constant (6.9+/-0.14 x 10(7) cfu/ml), while the concentration of Lb. gasseri K 7 was 5.9 x 10(7) and 1.3 x 10(7) cfu/ml in two independent experiments, respectively. The", " (6.9+/-0.14 x 10(7) cfu/ml), while the concentration of Lb. gasseri K 7 was 5.9 x 10(7) and 1.3 x 10(7) cfu/ml in two independent experiments, respectively. The adhesion of  [CLS] E. coli and Lb. gasseri K 7 cells to jejunal mucosa [CLS]  was similar (1.0+/-0.17 x 10(6) and 1.54+/-0.10 x 10(6) cfu/cm(2)) when the concentrations of single strains in suspensions were approximately the same. No significant competition, exclusion or displacement of", " was similar (1.0+/-0.17 x 10(6) and 1.54+/-0.10 x 10(6) cfu/cm(2)) when the concentrations of single strains in suspensions were approximately the same. No significant competition, exclusion or displacement of  [CLS] E. coli by lactobacilli was observed on jejunal tissue [CLS] . In conclusion, Lb. gasseri K 7 was found to be effective in reducing E. coli adhesion to Caco-2 enterocytes, but it was not able to do so in ex", " No significant competition, exclusion or displacement of E. coli by lactobacilli was observed on jejunal tissue. In conclusion, Lb. gasseri K 7 was found to be effective in reducing  [CLS] E. coli adhesion to Caco-2 enterocytes [CLS] , but it was not able to do so in ex vivo conditions tested for pig jejunal tissue.\n\n", " No significant competition, exclusion or displacement of E. coli by lactobacilli was observed on jejunal tissue. In conclusion, Lb. gasseri K 7 was found to be effective in reducing  [CLS] E. coli adhesion to Caco-2 enterocytes, but it was not able to do so in ex vivo conditions tested for pig jejunal tissue [CLS] .\n\n", " of the samples by real-time PCR, but in only 48.2% by culture, although the microorganisms were completely concordant. With the real-time PCR, the detection rate of H. influenzae from  [CLS] CSF was high, at 45.2%, followed by S. pneumoniae (21.4%), S. agalactiae (2.4%), E. coli [CLS]  (1.8%), L. monocytogenes (0.6%), and M. pneumoniae (0.6%). The detection rate with PCR was significantly better than that with cultures in patients with antibiotic administration (chi2=18.3182; P=0.0000). In conclusion,", " the microorganisms were completely concordant. With the real-time PCR, the detection rate of H. influenzae from CSF was high, at 45.2%, followed by S. pneumoniae (21.4%), S. agalactiae (2.4%),  [CLS] E. coli (1.8%), L. monocytogenes (0.6%), and M. pneumoniae (0.6%). The detection rate with PCR was significantly better than that with cultures in patients with antibiotic administration [CLS]  (chi2=18.3182; P=0.0000). In conclusion, detection with real-time PCR is useful for rapidly identifying the causative pathogens of meningitis and for examining the clinical course of chemotherapy.\n\n"]]
["bb_train_29", [" 4.3 x 10(8) cfu/well. The number of E. coli adhered to Caco-2 monolayer (cfu/well) was lineary correlated (R(2)=0.97) to the concentration of added cells. In the assay simulating exclusion,  [CLS] E. coli adhesion [CLS]  was reduced by Lb. gasseri K 7 strain by 0.1 to 0.6 log cfu/well. The binding of E. coli was inhibited even more when incubated simultaneously with lactobacilli, particularly", " to the concentration of added cells. In the assay simulating exclusion, E. coli adhesion was reduced by Lb. gasseri K 7 strain by 0.1 to 0.6 log cfu/well. The  [CLS] binding of E. coli [CLS]  was inhibited even more when incubated simultaneously with lactobacilli, particularly at the lowest concentration of E. coli (ratio E. coli/lactobacilli 1:248), where five-times reduction (or 0.7 log) was observed.", " was constant (6.9+/-0.14 x 10(7) cfu/ml), while the concentration of Lb. gasseri K 7 was 5.9 x 10(7) and 1.3 x 10(7) cfu/ml in two independent experiments, respectively. The  [CLS] adhesion of E. coli [CLS]  and Lb. gasseri K 7 cells to jejunal mucosa was similar (1.0+/-0.17 x 10(6) and 1.54+/-0.10 x 10(6) cfu/cm(2)) when the concentrations of single strains in suspensions were approximately", " No significant competition, exclusion or displacement of E. coli by lactobacilli was observed on jejunal tissue. In conclusion, Lb. gasseri K 7 was found to be effective in reducing  [CLS] E. coli adhesion [CLS]  to Caco-2 enterocytes, but it was not able to do so in ex vivo conditions tested for pig jejunal tissue.\n\n", " in >20 exchangeable effector loci scattered throughout the chromosome. Crucially, the majority of functional effector genes are encoded by nine exchangeable effector loci that lie within lambdoid prophages. Thus,  [CLS] type III secretion in E. coli [CLS]  is linked to a vast phage \"metagenome,\" acting as a crucible for the evolution of pathogenicity.\n\n", " performed by disk diffusion method. The results showed that the total of 418 strains were detected. Gram-negative bacteria were the most common of nosocomial infection. Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterobacter cloacae,  [CLS] E. coli account for the most of Gram negative [CLS] - bacteria infection and most resistant to broad-spectrum penicillin, Acinetobacter baumannii showed a trend of increase. The ratios of gram positive bacteria and fungi were increased slowly, mainly as Enterococcus", " performed by disk diffusion method. The results showed that the total of 418 strains were detected. Gram-negative bacteria were the most common of nosocomial infection. Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterobacter cloacae,  [CLS] E. coli account for the most of Gram negative- bacteria infection and most resistant to broad-spectrum penicillin [CLS] , Acinetobacter baumannii showed a trend of increase. The ratios of gram positive bacteria and fungi were increased slowly, mainly as Enterococcus and Candida. Enterococcus is the most common cause"]]
["bb_train_30", [" more when incubated simultaneously with lactobacilli, particularly at the lowest concentration of E. coli (ratio E. coli/lactobacilli 1:248), where five-times reduction (or 0.7 log) was observed. When adhesion to  [CLS] tissue derived from pigs' jejunum was tested, concentration of E. coli was constant (6.9+/-0.14 x 10(7) cfu/ml), while the concentration of Lb. gasseri K 7 [CLS]  was 5.9 x 10(7) and 1.3 x 10(7) cfu/ml in two independent experiments, respectively. The adhesion of E. coli and Lb. gasseri K 7 cells to jejunal mucosa was", " cfu/ml), while the concentration of Lb. gasseri K 7 was 5.9 x 10(7) and 1.3 x 10(7) cfu/ml in two independent experiments, respectively. The adhesion of E. coli and  [CLS] Lb. gasseri K 7 cells to jejunal mucosa [CLS]  was similar (1.0+/-0.17 x 10(6) and 1.54+/-0.10 x 10(6) cfu/cm(2)) when the concentrations of single strains in suspensions were approximately the same. No significant competition, exclusion or displacement of", " cfu/ml), while the concentration of Lb. gasseri K 7 was 5.9 x 10(7) and 1.3 x 10(7) cfu/ml in two independent experiments, respectively. The adhesion of E. coli and  [CLS] Lb. gasseri K 7 cells to jejunal [CLS]  mucosa was similar (1.0+/-0.17 x 10(6) and 1.54+/-0.10 x 10(6) cfu/cm(2)) when the concentrations of single strains in suspensions were approximately the same. No significant competition, exclusion or displacement", " the concentrations of single strains in suspensions were approximately the same. No significant competition, exclusion or displacement of E. coli by lactobacilli was observed on jejunal tissue. In conclusion,  [CLS] Lb. gasseri K 7 was found to be effective in reducing E. coli adhesion to Caco-2 enterocytes [CLS] , but it was not able to do so in ex vivo conditions tested for pig jejunal tissue.\n\n"]]
["bb_train_31", [" was constant (6.9+/-0.14 x 10(7) cfu/ml), while the concentration of Lb. gasseri K 7 was 5.9 x 10(7) and 1.3 x 10(7) cfu/ml in two independent experiments, respectively. The  [CLS] adhesion of E. coli and Lb. gasseri K 7 [CLS]  cells to jejunal mucosa was similar (1.0+/-0.17 x 10(6) and 1.54+/-0.10 x 10(6) cfu/cm(2)) when the concentrations of single strains in suspensions were approximately the same. No significant competition,"]]
["bb_train_32", [" control of gonorrhea in South America and the Caribbean: monitoring the development of resistance to antibiotics.\n: The objective of this study was to ascertain the antimicrobial susceptibility of  [CLS] Neisseria gonorrhoeae isolates from 6 South American and 13 Caribbean [CLS]  countries participating in the Gonococcal Antimicrobial Surveillance Program (GASP) from 1990 to 1999.\n: A GASP network of laboratories was launched in the Americas and the Caribbean during the", " control of gonorrhea in South America and the Caribbean: monitoring the development of resistance to antibiotics.\n: The objective of this study was to ascertain the antimicrobial susceptibility of  [CLS] Neisseria gonorrhoeae isolates from 6 South American [CLS]  and 13 Caribbean countries participating in the Gonococcal Antimicrobial Surveillance Program (GASP) from 1990 to 1999.\n: A GASP network of laboratories was launched in the Americas and the"]]
["bb_train_33", [" and 13 Caribbean countries participating in the Gonococcal Antimicrobial Surveillance Program (GASP) from 1990 to 1999.\n: A GASP network of laboratories was launched in the Americas and the  [CLS] Caribbean during the 1990s. Standardized methods and interpretative criteria were established for the isolation of N. gonorrhoeae [CLS] , strain identification, and determination, and quality control of antimicrobial susceptibility.\n: Two countries (Argentina and Uruguay) maintained continuous surveillance during the study period. Some countries gathered data periodically and", " 6 South American and 13 Caribbean countries participating in the Gonococcal Antimicrobial Surveillance Program (GASP) from 1990 to 1999.\n: A GASP network of laboratories was launched in the  [CLS] Americas and the Caribbean during the 1990s. Standardized methods and interpretative criteria were established for the isolation of N. gonorrhoeae [CLS] , strain identification, and determination, and quality control of antimicrobial susceptibility.\n: Two countries (Argentina and Uruguay) maintained continuous surveillance during the study period. Some countries gathered data periodically and"]]
["bb_train_34", [" during the study period. Some countries gathered data periodically and several others were unable to initiate antimicrobial surveillance as a result of lack of resources. The percentage of penicillin-resistant  [CLS] N. gonorrhoeae isolated in the region over the decade varied considerably (1.0-11.9% carried chromosomal resistance and 17.9-38.8% produced beta-lactamase) with an overall trend to declining numbers of penicillin-resistant isolates. For tetracycline, 7.4% to 36.3% carried chromosomal resistance, whereas 12.0% to 27.4% carried plasmid-mediated resistance [CLS] . There were no reports of ciprofloxacin-resistant isolates, although N. gonorrhoeae with decreased susceptibility to ciprofloxacin and azithromycin as well as spectinomycin-resistant isolates were identified in some countries.\n\n", " surveillance during the study period. Some countries gathered data periodically and several others were unable to initiate antimicrobial surveillance as a result of lack of resources. The percentage of  [CLS] penicillin-resistant N. gonorrhoeae [CLS]  isolated in the region over the decade varied considerably (1.0-11.9% carried chromosomal resistance and 17.9-38.8% produced beta-lactamase) with an overall trend to declining numbers of penicillin-resistant isolates. For tetracycline,", " during the study period. Some countries gathered data periodically and several others were unable to initiate antimicrobial surveillance as a result of lack of resources. The percentage of penicillin-resistant  [CLS] N. gonorrhoeae isolated in the region over the decade varied considerably (1.0-11.9% carried chromosomal resistance and 17.9-38.8% produced beta-lactamase) with an overall trend to declining numbers of penicillin-resistant [CLS]  isolates. For tetracycline, 7.4% to 36.3% carried chromosomal resistance, whereas 12.0% to 27.4% carried plasmid-mediated resistance. There were no reports of ciprofloxacin-resistant isolates, although N. gonorrhoeae with decreased susceptibility", " during the study period. Some countries gathered data periodically and several others were unable to initiate antimicrobial surveillance as a result of lack of resources. The percentage of penicillin-resistant  [CLS] N. gonorrhoeae isolated in the region over the decade varied considerably (1.0-11.9% carried chromosomal resistance and 17.9-38.8% produced beta-lactamase) with an overall trend to declining numbers of penicillin-resistant isolates. For tetracycline, 7.4% to 36.3% carried chromosomal resistance [CLS] , whereas 12.0% to 27.4% carried plasmid-mediated resistance. There were no reports of ciprofloxacin-resistant isolates, although N. gonorrhoeae with decreased susceptibility to ciprofloxacin and azithromycin as well as spectinomycin-resistant isolates", " during the study period. Some countries gathered data periodically and several others were unable to initiate antimicrobial surveillance as a result of lack of resources. The percentage of penicillin-resistant  [CLS] N. gonorrhoeae isolated in the region over the decade varied considerably (1.0-11.9% carried chromosomal resistance [CLS]  and 17.9-38.8% produced beta-lactamase) with an overall trend to declining numbers of penicillin-resistant isolates. For tetracycline, 7.4% to 36.3% carried chromosomal resistance, whereas 12.0% to 27.4% carried plasmid-mediated resistance.", " to declining numbers of penicillin-resistant isolates. For tetracycline, 7.4% to 36.3% carried chromosomal resistance, whereas 12.0% to 27.4% carried plasmid-mediated resistance. There were no reports of ciprofloxacin-resistant isolates, although  [CLS] N. gonorrhoeae with decreased susceptibility to ciprofloxacin [CLS]  and azithromycin as well as spectinomycin-resistant isolates were identified in some countries.\n\n", " to declining numbers of penicillin-resistant isolates. For tetracycline, 7.4% to 36.3% carried chromosomal resistance, whereas 12.0% to 27.4% carried plasmid-mediated resistance. There were no reports of ciprofloxacin-resistant isolates, although  [CLS] N. gonorrhoeae with decreased susceptibility to ciprofloxacin and azithromycin [CLS]  as well as spectinomycin-resistant isolates were identified in some countries.\n\n", " to declining numbers of penicillin-resistant isolates. For tetracycline, 7.4% to 36.3% carried chromosomal resistance, whereas 12.0% to 27.4% carried plasmid-mediated resistance. There were no reports of ciprofloxacin-resistant isolates, although  [CLS] N. gonorrhoeae with decreased susceptibility to ciprofloxacin and azithromycin as well as spectinomycin-resistant [CLS]  isolates were identified in some countries.\n\n"]]
["bb_train_35", [" [CLS] type III secretion effectors in Escherichia coli O157 [CLS]  and the role of lambdoid phages in their dissemination.\nSeveral pathogenic strains of Escherichia coli exploit type III secretion to inject \"effector proteins\" into human cells, which then subvert"]]
["bb_train_36", [" cells, which then subvert eukaryotic cell biology to the bacterium's advantage. We have exploited bioinformatics and experimental approaches to establish that the effector repertoire in the Sakai strain of  [CLS] enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC) O157:H7 [CLS]  is much larger than previously thought. Homology searches led to the identification of >60 putative effector genes. Thirteen of these were judged to be likely pseudogenes, whereas 49 were", " which then subvert eukaryotic cell biology to the bacterium's advantage. We have exploited bioinformatics and experimental approaches to establish that the effector repertoire in the Sakai strain of enterohemorrhagic  [CLS] E. coli (EHEC) O157:H7 [CLS]  is much larger than previously thought. Homology searches led to the identification of >60 putative effector genes. Thirteen of these were judged to be likely pseudogenes, whereas 49 were"]]
["bb_train_37", [" 49 were judged to be potentially functional. In total, 39 proteins were confirmed experimentally as effectors: 31 through proteomics and 28 through translocation assays. At the protein level, the  [CLS] EHEC [CLS]  effector sequences fall into >20 families. The largest family, the NleG family, contains 14 members in the Sakai strain alone. EHEC also harbors functional homologs of effectors from plant", " through translocation assays. At the protein level, the EHEC effector sequences fall into >20 families. The largest family, the NleG family, contains 14 members in the Sakai strain alone.  [CLS] EHEC [CLS]  also harbors functional homologs of effectors from plant pathogens (HopPtoH, HopW, AvrA) and from Shigella (OspD, OspE, OspG), and two additional members of the Map/IpgB family. Genes encoding proven"]]
["bb_train_38", [" [CLS] Quorum-sensing regulation of adhesion in Serratia marcescens MG1 [CLS]  is surface dependent.\nSerratia marcescens is an opportunistic pathogen and a major cause of ocular infections. In previous studies of S. marcescens MG1, we showed that biofilm maturation and", " [CLS] adhesion in Serratia marcescens MG1 [CLS]  is surface dependent.\nSerratia marcescens is an opportunistic pathogen and a major cause of ocular infections. In previous studies of S. marcescens MG1, we showed that biofilm maturation and"]]
["bb_train_39", [" [CLS] Serratia marcescens is an opportunistic pathogen and a major cause of ocular infections. In previous studies of S. marcescens MG1, we showed that biofilm maturation and sloughing were regulated by N-acyl homoserine lactone (AHL)-based quorum sensing (QS). Because of the importance of adhesion in initiating biofilm formation and infection, the primary goal of this study was to determine whether QS is important in adhesion to both abiotic and biotic surfaces, as assessed by determining the degree of attachment to hydrophilic tissue culture plates and human corneal epithelial (HCE) cells. Our results demonstrate that while adhesion to the abiotic surface [CLS]  was AHL regulated, adhesion to the HCE cell biotic surface was not. Type I fimbriae were identified as the critical adhesin for non-QS-mediated attachment to the biotic HCE cell", " [CLS] Serratia marcescens is an opportunistic pathogen and a major cause of ocular infections. In previous studies of S. marcescens MG1, we showed that biofilm maturation and sloughing were regulated by N-acyl homoserine lactone (AHL)-based quorum sensing (QS). Because of the importance of adhesion in initiating biofilm formation and infection, the primary goal of this study was to determine whether QS is important in adhesion to both abiotic and biotic surfaces, as assessed by determining the degree of attachment to hydrophilic tissue culture plates and human corneal epithelial (HCE) cells. Our results demonstrate that while adhesion to the abiotic surface was AHL regulated, adhesion to the HCE cell biotic surface was not. Type I fimbriae were identified as the critical adhesin for non-QS-mediated attachment to the biotic HCE cell surface but played no role in adhesion to the abiotic surface. While we were not able to identify a single QS-regulated adhesin essential for attachment to the abiotic surface, four AHL-regulated genes involved in adhesion to the abiotic surface were identified. Interestingly, two of these genes, bsmA and bsmB, were also shown to be involved in adhesion to the biotic surface in a non-QS-controlled fashion. Therefore, the expression of these two genes appears to be cocontrolled by regulators other than the QS system for mediation of attachment to HCE cells [CLS] . We also found that QS in S. marcescens regulates other potential cell surface adhesins, including exopolysaccharide and the outer membrane protein OmpX. We concluded that S. marcescens MG1 utilizes", " [CLS] Serratia marcescens is an opportunistic pathogen and a major cause of ocular [CLS]  infections. In previous studies of S. marcescens MG1, we showed that biofilm maturation and sloughing were regulated by N-acyl homoserine lactone (AHL)-based quorum sensing (QS). Because of the importance", " [CLS] Serratia marcescens is an opportunistic pathogen and a major cause of ocular infections. In previous studies of S. marcescens MG1, we showed that biofilm maturation and sloughing were regulated by N-acyl homoserine lactone (AHL)-based quorum sensing (QS). Because of the importance of adhesion in initiating biofilm formation and infection, the primary goal of this study was to determine whether QS is important in adhesion to both abiotic and biotic surfaces, as assessed by determining the degree of attachment to hydrophilic tissue culture plates and human corneal epithelial (HCE) cells. Our results demonstrate that while adhesion to the abiotic surface was AHL regulated, adhesion to the HCE cell biotic surface [CLS]  was not. Type I fimbriae were identified as the critical adhesin for non-QS-mediated attachment to the biotic HCE cell surface but played no role in adhesion to the abiotic", " [CLS] Serratia marcescens is an opportunistic pathogen and a major cause of ocular infections. In previous studies of S. marcescens MG1, we showed that biofilm maturation and sloughing were regulated by N-acyl homoserine lactone (AHL)-based quorum sensing (QS). Because of the importance of adhesion in initiating biofilm formation and infection, the primary goal of this study was to determine whether QS is important in adhesion to both abiotic and biotic surfaces, as assessed by determining the degree of attachment to hydrophilic tissue culture plates and human corneal epithelial (HCE) cells. Our results demonstrate that while adhesion to the abiotic surface was AHL regulated, adhesion to the HCE cell biotic surface was not. Type I fimbriae were identified as the critical adhesin for non-QS-mediated attachment to the biotic HCE cell surface but played no role in adhesion to the abiotic surface. While we were not able to identify a single QS-regulated adhesin essential for attachment to the abiotic surface, four AHL-regulated genes involved in adhesion to the abiotic surface were identified. Interestingly, two of these genes, bsmA and bsmB, were also shown to be involved in adhesion to the biotic surface [CLS]  in a non-QS-controlled fashion. Therefore, the expression of these two genes appears to be cocontrolled by regulators other than the QS system for mediation of attachment to HCE cells.", " [CLS] Serratia marcescens is an opportunistic pathogen and a major cause of ocular infections. In previous studies of S. marcescens MG1, we showed that biofilm maturation and sloughing were regulated by N-acyl homoserine lactone (AHL)-based quorum sensing (QS). Because of the importance of adhesion in initiating biofilm formation and infection, the primary goal of this study was to determine whether QS is important in adhesion to both abiotic and biotic surfaces, as assessed by determining the degree of attachment to hydrophilic tissue culture plates and human corneal epithelial (HCE) cells. Our results demonstrate that while adhesion to the abiotic surface was AHL regulated, adhesion to the HCE cell biotic surface was not. Type I fimbriae were identified as the critical adhesin for non-QS-mediated attachment to the biotic HCE cell surface but played no role in adhesion to the abiotic surface. While we were not able to identify a single QS-regulated adhesin essential for attachment to the abiotic surface, four AHL-regulated genes involved in adhesion to the abiotic surface [CLS]  were identified. Interestingly, two of these genes, bsmA and bsmB, were also shown to be involved in adhesion to the biotic surface in a non-QS-controlled fashion. Therefore, the expression", " [CLS] Serratia marcescens is an opportunistic pathogen and a major cause of ocular infections. In previous studies of S. marcescens MG1, we showed that biofilm maturation and sloughing were regulated by N-acyl homoserine lactone (AHL)-based quorum sensing (QS). Because of the importance of adhesion in initiating biofilm formation and infection, the primary goal of this study was to determine whether QS is important in adhesion to both abiotic and biotic surfaces, as assessed by determining the degree of attachment to hydrophilic tissue culture plates and human corneal epithelial (HCE) cells. Our results demonstrate that while adhesion to the abiotic surface was AHL regulated, adhesion to the HCE cell biotic surface was not. Type I fimbriae were identified as the critical adhesin for non-QS-mediated attachment to the biotic HCE cell surface but played no role in adhesion to the abiotic surface [CLS] . While we were not able to identify a single QS-regulated adhesin essential for attachment to the abiotic surface, four AHL-regulated genes involved in adhesion to the abiotic surface were", " [CLS] Serratia marcescens is an opportunistic pathogen and a major cause of ocular infections. In previous studies of S. marcescens MG1, we showed that biofilm maturation and sloughing were regulated by N-acyl homoserine lactone (AHL)-based quorum sensing (QS). Because of the importance of adhesion in initiating biofilm formation and infection, the primary goal of this study was to determine whether QS is important in adhesion to both abiotic and biotic surfaces, as assessed by determining the degree of attachment to hydrophilic tissue culture plates and human corneal epithelial (HCE) cells. Our results demonstrate that while adhesion to the abiotic surface was AHL regulated, adhesion to the HCE cell biotic surface was not. Type I fimbriae were identified as the critical adhesin for non-QS-mediated attachment to the biotic HCE cell surface but played no role in adhesion to the abiotic surface. While we were not able to identify a single QS-regulated adhesin essential for attachment to the abiotic surface [CLS] , four AHL-regulated genes involved in adhesion to the abiotic surface were identified. Interestingly, two of these genes, bsmA and bsmB, were also shown to be involved in adhesion to", " [CLS] Serratia marcescens is an opportunistic pathogen and a major cause of ocular infections. In previous studies of S. marcescens MG1, we showed that biofilm maturation and sloughing were regulated by N-acyl homoserine lactone (AHL)-based quorum sensing (QS). Because of the importance of adhesion in initiating biofilm formation and infection, the primary goal of this study was to determine whether QS is important in adhesion to both abiotic and biotic surfaces, as assessed by determining the degree of attachment to hydrophilic tissue culture plates and human corneal epithelial (HCE) cells. Our results demonstrate that while adhesion to the abiotic surface was AHL regulated, adhesion to the HCE cell biotic surface was not. Type I fimbriae were identified as the critical adhesin for non-QS-mediated attachment to the biotic HCE cell surface [CLS]  but played no role in adhesion to the abiotic surface. While we were not able to identify a single QS-regulated adhesin essential for attachment to the abiotic surface, four"]]
["bb_train_40", [" [CLS] Serratia marcescens is an opportunistic pathogen and a major cause of ocular infections. In previous studies of S. marcescens MG1, we showed that biofilm maturation and sloughing were regulated by N-acyl homoserine lactone (AHL)-based quorum sensing (QS). Because of the importance of adhesion in initiating biofilm formation and infection, the primary goal of this study was to determine whether QS is important in adhesion to both abiotic and biotic surfaces, as assessed by determining the degree of attachment to hydrophilic tissue culture plates and human corneal epithelial (HCE) cells. Our results demonstrate that while adhesion to the abiotic surface was AHL regulated, adhesion to the HCE cell biotic surface was not. Type I fimbriae were identified as the critical adhesin for non-QS-mediated attachment to the biotic HCE cell surface but played no role in adhesion [CLS]  to the abiotic surface. While we were not able to identify a single QS-regulated adhesin essential for attachment to the abiotic surface, four AHL-regulated genes involved in adhesion to", " [CLS] Serratia marcescens is an opportunistic pathogen [CLS]  and a major cause of ocular infections. In previous studies of S. marcescens MG1, we showed that biofilm maturation and sloughing were regulated by N-acyl homoserine lactone (AHL)-based quorum", " [CLS] Serratia marcescens is an opportunistic pathogen and a major cause of ocular infections. In previous studies of S. marcescens MG1, we showed that biofilm maturation and sloughing were regulated by N-acyl homoserine lactone (AHL)-based quorum sensing (QS). Because of the importance of adhesion in initiating biofilm formation and infection, the primary goal of this study was to determine whether QS is important in adhesion to both abiotic and biotic surfaces, as assessed by determining the degree of attachment to hydrophilic tissue culture plates and human corneal epithelial (HCE) cells. Our results demonstrate that while adhesion to the abiotic surface was AHL regulated, adhesion to the HCE cell biotic surface was not. Type I fimbriae were identified as the critical adhesin for non-QS-mediated attachment to the biotic HCE cell surface but played no role in adhesion to the abiotic surface. While we were not able to identify a single QS-regulated adhesin essential for attachment to the abiotic surface, four AHL-regulated genes involved in adhesion to the abiotic surface were identified. Interestingly, two of these genes, bsmA and bsmB, were also shown to be involved in adhesion to the biotic surface in a non-QS-controlled fashion. Therefore, the expression of these two genes appears to be cocontrolled by regulators other than the QS system for mediation of attachment [CLS]  to HCE cells. We also found that QS in S. marcescens regulates other potential cell surface adhesins, including exopolysaccharide and the outer membrane protein OmpX. We concluded that S.", " [CLS] Serratia marcescens is an opportunistic pathogen and a major cause of ocular infections. In previous studies of S. marcescens MG1, we showed that biofilm maturation and sloughing were regulated by N-acyl homoserine lactone (AHL)-based quorum sensing (QS). Because of the importance of adhesion in initiating biofilm formation and infection, the primary goal of this study was to determine whether QS is important in adhesion to both abiotic and biotic surfaces, as assessed by determining the degree of attachment to hydrophilic tissue culture plates and human corneal epithelial (HCE) cells. Our results demonstrate that while adhesion to the abiotic surface was AHL regulated, adhesion to the HCE cell biotic surface was not. Type I fimbriae were identified as the critical adhesin for non-QS-mediated attachment to the biotic HCE cell surface but played no role in adhesion to the abiotic surface. While we were not able to identify a single QS-regulated adhesin essential for attachment [CLS]  to the abiotic surface, four AHL-regulated genes involved in adhesion to the abiotic surface were identified. Interestingly, two of these genes, bsmA and bsmB, were also shown to be", " [CLS] Serratia marcescens is an opportunistic pathogen and a major cause of ocular infections. In previous studies of S. marcescens MG1, we showed that biofilm maturation and sloughing were regulated by N-acyl homoserine lactone (AHL)-based quorum sensing (QS). Because of the importance of adhesion in initiating biofilm formation and infection, the primary goal of this study was to determine whether QS is important in adhesion to both abiotic and biotic surfaces, as assessed by determining the degree of attachment to hydrophilic tissue culture plates and human corneal epithelial (HCE) cells. Our results demonstrate that while adhesion to the abiotic surface was AHL regulated, adhesion to the HCE cell biotic surface was not. Type I fimbriae were identified as the critical adhesin for non-QS-mediated attachment [CLS]  to the biotic HCE cell surface but played no role in adhesion to the abiotic surface. While we were not able to identify a single QS-regulated adhesin essential for", " [CLS] Serratia marcescens is an opportunistic pathogen and a major cause of ocular infections. In previous studies of S. marcescens MG1, we showed that biofilm maturation and sloughing were regulated by N-acyl homoserine lactone (AHL)-based quorum sensing (QS). Because of the importance of adhesion in initiating biofilm formation and infection, the primary goal of this study was to determine whether QS is important in adhesion to both abiotic and biotic surfaces, as assessed by determining the degree of attachment to hydrophilic tissue culture plates and human corneal epithelial (HCE) cells. Our results demonstrate that while adhesion to the abiotic surface was AHL regulated, adhesion [CLS]  to the HCE cell biotic surface was not. Type I fimbriae were identified as the critical adhesin for non-QS-mediated attachment to the biotic HCE cell surface but played no", " [CLS] Serratia marcescens is an opportunistic pathogen and a major cause of ocular infections. In previous studies of S. marcescens MG1, we showed that biofilm maturation and sloughing were regulated by N-acyl homoserine lactone (AHL)-based quorum sensing (QS). Because of the importance of adhesion in initiating biofilm formation and infection, the primary goal of this study was to determine whether QS is important in adhesion to both abiotic and biotic surfaces, as assessed by determining the degree of attachment to hydrophilic tissue culture plates and human corneal epithelial (HCE) cells. Our results demonstrate that while adhesion to the abiotic surface was AHL regulated, adhesion to the HCE cell biotic surface was not. Type I fimbriae were identified as the critical adhesin for non-QS-mediated attachment to the biotic HCE cell surface but played no role in adhesion to the abiotic surface. While we were not able to identify a single QS-regulated adhesin essential for attachment to the abiotic surface, four AHL-regulated genes involved in adhesion to the abiotic surface were identified. Interestingly, two of these genes, bsmA and bsmB, were also shown to be involved in adhesion [CLS]  to the biotic surface in a non-QS-controlled fashion. Therefore, the expression of these two genes appears to be cocontrolled by regulators other than the QS system for mediation of", " [CLS] Serratia marcescens is an opportunistic pathogen and a major cause of ocular infections. In previous studies of S. marcescens MG1, we showed that biofilm maturation and sloughing were regulated by N-acyl homoserine lactone (AHL)-based quorum sensing (QS). Because of the importance of adhesion in initiating biofilm formation and infection, the primary goal of this study was to determine whether QS is important in adhesion to both abiotic and biotic surfaces, as assessed by determining the degree of attachment to hydrophilic tissue culture plates and human corneal epithelial (HCE) cells. Our results demonstrate that while adhesion [CLS]  to the abiotic surface was AHL regulated, adhesion to the HCE cell biotic surface was not. Type I fimbriae were identified as the critical adhesin for non-QS-mediated attachment to", " [CLS] Serratia marcescens is an opportunistic pathogen and a major cause of ocular infections. In previous studies of S. marcescens MG1, we showed that biofilm maturation and sloughing were regulated by N-acyl homoserine lactone (AHL)-based quorum sensing (QS). Because of the importance of adhesion in initiating biofilm formation and infection, the primary goal of this study was to determine whether QS is important in adhesion to both abiotic and biotic surfaces, as assessed by determining the degree of attachment to hydrophilic tissue culture plates and human corneal epithelial (HCE) cells. Our results demonstrate that while adhesion to the abiotic surface was AHL regulated, adhesion to the HCE cell biotic surface was not. Type I fimbriae were identified as the critical adhesin for non-QS-mediated attachment to the biotic HCE cell surface but played no role in adhesion to the abiotic surface. While we were not able to identify a single QS-regulated adhesin essential for attachment to the abiotic surface, four AHL-regulated genes involved in adhesion [CLS]  to the abiotic surface were identified. Interestingly, two of these genes, bsmA and bsmB, were also shown to be involved in adhesion to the biotic surface in a non-QS-controlled"]]
["bb_train_41", [" [CLS] S. marcescens MG1, we showed that biofilm [CLS]  maturation and sloughing were regulated by N-acyl homoserine lactone (AHL)-based quorum sensing (QS). Because of the importance of adhesion in initiating biofilm formation and infection, the primary goal of", " attachment to HCE cells. We also found that QS in S. marcescens regulates other potential cell surface adhesins, including exopolysaccharide and the outer membrane protein OmpX. We concluded that  [CLS] S. marcescens MG1 utilizes different regulatory systems and adhesins in attachment to biotic and abiotic surfaces and that QS is a main regulatory pathway in adhesion to an abiotic surface [CLS]  but not in adhesion to a biotic surface.\n\n", " attachment to HCE cells. We also found that QS in S. marcescens regulates other potential cell surface adhesins, including exopolysaccharide and the outer membrane protein OmpX. We concluded that  [CLS] S. marcescens MG1 utilizes different regulatory systems and adhesins in attachment to biotic and abiotic surfaces [CLS]  and that QS is a main regulatory pathway in adhesion to an abiotic surface but not in adhesion to a biotic surface.\n\n", " attachment to HCE cells. We also found that QS in S. marcescens regulates other potential cell surface adhesins, including exopolysaccharide and the outer membrane protein OmpX. We concluded that  [CLS] S. marcescens MG1 utilizes different regulatory systems and adhesins in attachment to biotic and abiotic surfaces and that QS is a main regulatory pathway in adhesion to an abiotic surface but not in adhesion to a biotic surface [CLS] .\n\n", " attachment to HCE cells. We also found that QS in S. marcescens regulates other potential cell surface adhesins, including exopolysaccharide and the outer membrane protein OmpX. We concluded that  [CLS] S. marcescens MG1 utilizes different regulatory systems and adhesins in attachment to biotic and abiotic surfaces [CLS]  and that QS is a main regulatory pathway in adhesion to an abiotic surface but not in adhesion to a biotic surface.\n\n"]]
["bb_train_42", [" [CLS] S. marcescens MG1, we showed that biofilm maturation [CLS]  and sloughing were regulated by N-acyl homoserine lactone (AHL)-based quorum sensing (QS). Because of the importance of adhesion in initiating biofilm formation and infection, the primary goal of this", " [CLS] S. marcescens MG1, we showed that biofilm maturation and sloughing were regulated by N-acyl homoserine lactone (AHL)-based quorum sensing [CLS]  (QS). Because of the importance of adhesion in initiating biofilm formation and infection, the primary goal of this study was to determine whether QS is important in adhesion to", " attachment to HCE cells. We also found that QS in S. marcescens regulates other potential cell surface adhesins, including exopolysaccharide and the outer membrane protein OmpX. We concluded that  [CLS] S. marcescens MG1 utilizes different regulatory systems and adhesins in attachment to biotic and abiotic surfaces and that QS [CLS]  is a main regulatory pathway in adhesion to an abiotic surface but not in adhesion to a biotic surface.\n\n", " attachment to HCE cells. We also found that QS in S. marcescens regulates other potential cell surface adhesins, including exopolysaccharide and the outer membrane protein OmpX. We concluded that  [CLS] S. marcescens MG1 utilizes different regulatory systems and adhesins in attachment [CLS]  to biotic and abiotic surfaces and that QS is a main regulatory pathway in adhesion to an abiotic surface but not in adhesion to a biotic surface.\n\n", " attachment to HCE cells. We also found that QS in S. marcescens regulates other potential cell surface adhesins, including exopolysaccharide and the outer membrane protein OmpX. We concluded that  [CLS] S. marcescens MG1 utilizes different regulatory systems and adhesins in attachment to biotic and abiotic surfaces and that QS is a main regulatory pathway in adhesion to an abiotic surface but not in adhesion [CLS]  to a biotic surface.\n\n", " attachment to HCE cells. We also found that QS in S. marcescens regulates other potential cell surface adhesins, including exopolysaccharide and the outer membrane protein OmpX. We concluded that  [CLS] S. marcescens MG1 utilizes different regulatory systems and adhesins in attachment to biotic and abiotic surfaces and that QS is a main regulatory pathway in adhesion [CLS]  to an abiotic surface but not in adhesion to a biotic surface.\n\n"]]
["bb_train_43", [" Therefore, the expression of these two genes appears to be cocontrolled by regulators other than the QS system for mediation of attachment to HCE cells. We also found that  [CLS] QS in S. marcescens [CLS]  regulates other potential cell surface adhesins, including exopolysaccharide and the outer membrane protein OmpX. We concluded that S. marcescens MG1 utilizes different regulatory systems and adhesins in attachment to"]]
["bb_train_44", [" other molecules. These molecules are essential to bacterial pathogenesis either during colonization or the spread/invasion stages, and most are virulence factors. This review is focused on such molecules using  [CLS] Streptococcus pneumoniae, a Gram-positive [CLS]  bacterium, as an example. Selected surface proteins are introduced, their structure described, and, whenever available, their mechanisms of function on an atomic level are explained. Such mechanisms for hyaluronate", " by real-time PCR.\nWe aimed to detect causative pathogens in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) collected from patients diagnosed with bacterial meningitis by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). In addition to  [CLS] Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae described previously, five other pathogens [CLS] , Neisseria meningitidis, Escherichia coli, Streptococcus agalactiae, Staphylococcus aureus, and Listeria monocytogenes, were targeted, based on a large-scale surveillance in Japan. Results in CSF from neonates and children (n=150), and"]]
["bb_train_45", [" [CLS] Haemophilus influenzae isolates from two children attending a day care center [CLS] .\nTwenty-one nontypeable Haemophilus influenzae (NTHi) isolates from the throats of two healthy children were genotyped by multilocus sequence typing. Nine unique sequence types (STs) were identified. These STs were", " [CLS] Haemophilus influenzae (NTHi) isolates from the throats of two healthy children [CLS]  were genotyped by multilocus sequence typing. Nine unique sequence types (STs) were identified. These STs were scattered throughout the phylogenetic tree of reported NTHi STs, demonstrating the high level", " [CLS] Haemophilus influenzae (NTHi) isolates from the throats of two healthy children [CLS]  were genotyped by multilocus sequence typing. Nine unique sequence types (STs) were identified. These STs were scattered throughout the phylogenetic tree of reported NTHi STs, demonstrating the high level"]]
["bb_train_46", [" genotyped by multilocus sequence typing. Nine unique sequence types (STs) were identified. These STs were scattered throughout the phylogenetic tree of reported NTHi STs, demonstrating the high level of  [CLS] NTHi diversity found in colonized children [CLS] .\n\n"]]
["bb_train_47", [" analysis revealed a broad expression of MyD88 with the highest expression in the spleen and the weakest expression in the muscle. The expression of MyD88 after challenge with formalin-inactivated  [CLS] Gram-negative bacterium Vibrio parahaemolyticus [CLS]  was tested in blood, spleen and liver. It suggested that the highest expression was in the spleen (p<0.05) with 1.9 times (at 48 h) as much as that in"]]
["bb_train_48", [" [CLS] Staphylococcus biofilms [CLS] .\nStaphylococcus growth on medical devices represents a common occurrence that can lead to serious illness and death. Biomaterial-associated infection, mostly caused by Staphylococcus epidermidis and Staphylococcus aureus, is fairly", " [CLS] Staphylococcus growth on medical devices [CLS]  represents a common occurrence that can lead to serious illness and death. Biomaterial-associated infection, mostly caused by Staphylococcus epidermidis and Staphylococcus aureus, is fairly complicated by the organism' development"]]
["bb_train_49", [" [CLS] Biomaterial-associated infection, mostly caused by Staphylococcus epidermidis [CLS]  and Staphylococcus aureus, is fairly complicated by the organism' development of a biofilm, which provides a microenvironment that protects from attack by the host immune system and antibiotics. In", " [CLS] Staphylococcus epidermidis and Staphylococcus aureus, is fairly complicated by the organism' development of a biofilm [CLS] , which provides a microenvironment that protects from attack by the host immune system and antibiotics. In this review we present recent insights regarding S. aureus and S. epidermidis structural"]]
["bb_train_50", [" [CLS] Staphylococcus epidermidis and Staphylococcus aureus, is fairly complicated by the organism' development of a biofilm [CLS] , which provides a microenvironment that protects from attack by the host immune system and antibiotics. In this review we present recent insights regarding S. aureus and S. epidermidis structural"]]
["bb_train_51", [" the organism' development of a biofilm, which provides a microenvironment that protects from attack by the host immune system and antibiotics. In this review we present recent insights regarding  [CLS] S. aureus and S. epidermidis structural and functional factors that are effective in biofilm [CLS]  development and describe the regulation of their expression. On the basis of the knowledge gained, we also present the potential and limits of current biochemical and biophysical strategies aimed", " examined jail environmental surfaces to explore whether they might serve as reservoirs of viable methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). We swabbed 132 surfaces, inoculated primary and secondary mannitol salts and  [CLS] oxacillin-resistant screening agar, and used API tests to identify S. aureus and E-tests to determine methicillin/oxacillin resistance. We recovered S. aureus [CLS]  from 10 (7.6%) surfaces; eight (6.1%) isolates were MRSA. We ran pulsed-field gel electrophoresis on six resistant isolates and observed three patterns, one of which was identical to that", " [CLS] jail environmental surfaces to explore whether they might serve as reservoirs of viable methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). We swabbed 132 surfaces, inoculated primary and secondary mannitol salts and oxacillin-resistant screening agar, and used API tests to identify S. aureus and E-tests to determine methicillin/oxacillin resistance. We recovered S. aureus [CLS]  from 10 (7.6%) surfaces; eight (6.1%) isolates were MRSA. We ran pulsed-field gel electrophoresis on six resistant isolates and observed three patterns, one of which was identical to that", " [CLS] jail environmental surfaces to explore whether they might serve as reservoirs of viable methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). We swabbed 132 surfaces, inoculated primary and secondary mannitol salts and oxacillin-resistant screening agar, and used API tests to identify S. aureus and E-tests to determine methicillin/oxacillin resistance. We recovered S. aureus [CLS]  from 10 (7.6%) surfaces; eight (6.1%) isolates were MRSA. We ran pulsed-field gel electrophoresis on six resistant isolates and observed three patterns, one of which was identical to that", " surfaces in a jail setting.\nWe examined jail environmental surfaces to explore whether they might serve as reservoirs of viable methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). We swabbed 132 surfaces, inoculated  [CLS] primary and secondary mannitol salts and oxacillin-resistant screening agar, and used API tests to identify S. aureus and E-tests to determine methicillin/oxacillin resistance. We recovered S. aureus [CLS]  from 10 (7.6%) surfaces; eight (6.1%) isolates were MRSA. We ran pulsed-field gel electrophoresis on six resistant isolates and observed three patterns, one of which was identical to that"]]
["bb_train_52", [" the organism' development of a biofilm, which provides a microenvironment that protects from attack by the host immune system and antibiotics. In this review we present recent insights regarding  [CLS] S. aureus and S. epidermidis structural and functional factors that are effective in biofilm development [CLS]  and describe the regulation of their expression. On the basis of the knowledge gained, we also present the potential and limits of current biochemical and biophysical strategies aimed at", " swabbed 132 surfaces, inoculated primary and secondary mannitol salts and oxacillin-resistant screening agar, and used API tests to identify S. aureus and E-tests to determine methicillin/oxacillin resistance. We recovered  [CLS] S. aureus from 10 (7.6%) surfaces; eight (6.1%) isolates were MRSA [CLS] . We ran pulsed-field gel electrophoresis on six resistant isolates and observed three patterns, one of which was identical to that identified in a previous study of inmates' nasal specimens."]]
["bb_train_53", [" of a biofilm, which provides a microenvironment that protects from attack by the host immune system and antibiotics. In this review we present recent insights regarding S. aureus and  [CLS] S. epidermidis structural and functional factors that are effective in biofilm [CLS]  development and describe the regulation of their expression. On the basis of the knowledge gained, we also present the potential and limits of current biochemical and biophysical strategies aimed"]]
["bb_train_54", [" of a biofilm, which provides a microenvironment that protects from attack by the host immune system and antibiotics. In this review we present recent insights regarding S. aureus and  [CLS] S. epidermidis structural and functional factors that are effective in biofilm development [CLS]  and describe the regulation of their expression. On the basis of the knowledge gained, we also present the potential and limits of current biochemical and biophysical strategies aimed at"]]
["bb_train_55", ["\nThe purpose of this study was to determine the changes of pathogens in hematological ward and susceptibility of patients received chemotherapy to antibiotics. The pathogens were taken from blood,  [CLS] urine and sputum of patients who accepted chemotherapy from years 2001 to 2005, then were isolated and identified. The susceptibility test was performed by disk diffusion method. The results showed that the total of 418 strains were detected. Gram-negative bacteria were the most common of nosocomial infection. Pseudomonas aeruginosa [CLS] , Enterobacter cloacae, E. coli account for the most of Gram negative- bacteria infection and most resistant to broad-spectrum penicillin, Acinetobacter baumannii showed a trend of increase. The ratios of", " study was to determine the changes of pathogens in hematological ward and susceptibility of patients received chemotherapy to antibiotics. The pathogens were taken from blood, urine and sputum of  [CLS] patients who accepted chemotherapy from years 2001 to 2005, then were isolated and identified. The susceptibility test was performed by disk diffusion method. The results showed that the total of 418 strains were detected. Gram-negative bacteria were the most common of nosocomial infection. Pseudomonas aeruginosa [CLS] , Enterobacter cloacae, E. coli account for the most of Gram negative- bacteria infection and most resistant to broad-spectrum penicillin, Acinetobacter baumannii showed a trend of increase. The ratios of", " of this study was to determine the changes of pathogens in hematological ward and susceptibility of patients received chemotherapy to antibiotics. The pathogens were taken from blood, urine and  [CLS] sputum of patients who accepted chemotherapy from years 2001 to 2005, then were isolated and identified. The susceptibility test was performed by disk diffusion method. The results showed that the total of 418 strains were detected. Gram-negative bacteria were the most common of nosocomial infection. Pseudomonas aeruginosa [CLS] , Enterobacter cloacae, E. coli account for the most of Gram negative- bacteria infection and most resistant to broad-spectrum penicillin, Acinetobacter baumannii showed a trend of increase. The ratios of", " and identified. The susceptibility test was performed by disk diffusion method. The results showed that the total of 418 strains were detected. Gram-negative bacteria were the most common of  [CLS] nosocomial infection. Pseudomonas aeruginosa [CLS] , Enterobacter cloacae, E. coli account for the most of Gram negative- bacteria infection and most resistant to broad-spectrum penicillin, Acinetobacter baumannii showed a trend of increase. The ratios of", " 2005].\nThe purpose of this study was to determine the changes of pathogens in hematological ward and susceptibility of patients received chemotherapy to antibiotics. The pathogens were taken from  [CLS] blood, urine and sputum of patients who accepted chemotherapy from years 2001 to 2005, then were isolated and identified. The susceptibility test was performed by disk diffusion method. The results showed that the total of 418 strains were detected. Gram-negative bacteria were the most common of nosocomial infection. Pseudomonas aeruginosa [CLS] , Enterobacter cloacae, E. coli account for the most of Gram negative- bacteria infection and most resistant to broad-spectrum penicillin, Acinetobacter baumannii showed a trend of increase. The ratios of", " [CLS] Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a Gram-negative bacterium that causes life-threatening infections in susceptible individuals [CLS]  and is resistant to most clinically available antimicrobials. Genomic and proteomic studies have identified three genes, pa0102, pa2053 and pa4676, in P. aeruginosa PAO1 encoding three functional \u03b2-carbonic anhydrases", " [CLS] Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P. aeruginosa) strains in vitro, using laser-based photoacoustic spectroscopy. Simultaneously, the production of ammonia (NH3) was measured, and the influence of different factors (e.g. the medium, temperature and antibiotics treatment) was assessed. Both reference strains and clinical [CLS]  isolates of patients with CF were studied, and compared to other pathogens commonly present in lungs/airways of CF patients. Hydrogen cyanide production starts to rise as soon as P.", " [CLS] Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P. aeruginosa) strains in vitro, using laser-based photoacoustic spectroscopy. Simultaneously, the production of ammonia (NH3) was measured, and the influence of different factors (e.g. the medium, temperature and antibiotics treatment) was assessed. Both reference strains and clinical isolates of patients with CF [CLS]  were studied, and compared to other pathogens commonly present in lungs/airways of CF patients. Hydrogen cyanide production starts to rise as soon as P. aeruginosa bacteria reach the stationary", " [CLS] Pseudomonas aeruginosa, suspended in 20% sucrose or 0.2 m MgCl(2) [CLS] , were examined in detail. Preparation of spheroplasts in the presence of 0.2 m Mg(2+) released periplasmic alkaline phosphatase, whereas preparation in the presence of 20% sucrose did not, even", " [CLS] Pseudomonas aeruginosa, suspended in 20% sucrose [CLS]  or 0.2 m MgCl(2), were examined in detail. Preparation of spheroplasts in the presence of 0.2 m Mg(2+) released periplasmic alkaline phosphatase, whereas preparation in the presence of 20%"]]
["bb_train_56", [" The susceptibility test was performed by disk diffusion method. The results showed that the total of 418 strains were detected. Gram-negative bacteria were the most common of nosocomial infection.  [CLS] Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterobacter cloacae, E. coli account for the most of Gram negative- bacteria infection and most resistant to broad-spectrum penicillin [CLS] , Acinetobacter baumannii showed a trend of increase. The ratios of gram positive bacteria and fungi were increased slowly, mainly as Enterococcus and Candida. Enterococcus is the most common cause", " The susceptibility test was performed by disk diffusion method. The results showed that the total of 418 strains were detected. Gram-negative bacteria were the most common of nosocomial infection.  [CLS] Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterobacter cloacae, E. coli account for the most of Gram negative [CLS] - bacteria infection and most resistant to broad-spectrum penicillin, Acinetobacter baumannii showed a trend of increase. The ratios of gram positive bacteria and fungi were increased slowly, mainly as Enterococcus", " [CLS] Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a Gram-negative [CLS]  bacterium that causes life-threatening infections in susceptible individuals and is resistant to most clinically available antimicrobials. Genomic and proteomic studies have identified three genes, pa0102, pa2053 and pa4676, in", " [CLS] Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a Gram-negative bacterium that causes life-threatening infections in susceptible individuals and is resistant to most clinically available antimicrobials [CLS] . Genomic and proteomic studies have identified three genes, pa0102, pa2053 and pa4676, in P. aeruginosa PAO1 encoding three functional \u03b2-carbonic anhydrases (\u03b2-CAs): psCA1, psCA2 and psCA3, respectively. These \u03b2-CAs", " [CLS] hydrogen cyanide (HCN) and ammonia (NH\u2083) emitted by Pseudomonas aeruginosa [CLS] .\nWe present the real-time monitoring of hydrogen cyanide (HCN) production from Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P. aeruginosa) strains in vitro, using laser-based photoacoustic spectroscopy. Simultaneously, the production of ammonia (NH3) was", " [CLS] hydrogen cyanide (HCN) production from Pseudomonas aeruginosa [CLS]  (P. aeruginosa) strains in vitro, using laser-based photoacoustic spectroscopy. Simultaneously, the production of ammonia (NH3) was measured, and the influence of different factors (e.g. the medium, temperature and antibiotics"]]
["bb_train_57", ["\nThe purpose of this study was to determine the changes of pathogens in hematological ward and susceptibility of patients received chemotherapy to antibiotics. The pathogens were taken from blood,  [CLS] urine and sputum of patients who accepted chemotherapy from years 2001 to 2005, then were isolated and identified. The susceptibility test was performed by disk diffusion method. The results showed that the total of 418 strains were detected. Gram-negative bacteria were the most common of nosocomial infection. Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterobacter cloacae [CLS] , E. coli account for the most of Gram negative- bacteria infection and most resistant to broad-spectrum penicillin, Acinetobacter baumannii showed a trend of increase. The ratios of gram positive", " and identified. The susceptibility test was performed by disk diffusion method. The results showed that the total of 418 strains were detected. Gram-negative bacteria were the most common of  [CLS] nosocomial infection. Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterobacter cloacae [CLS] , E. coli account for the most of Gram negative- bacteria infection and most resistant to broad-spectrum penicillin, Acinetobacter baumannii showed a trend of increase. The ratios of gram positive", " 2005].\nThe purpose of this study was to determine the changes of pathogens in hematological ward and susceptibility of patients received chemotherapy to antibiotics. The pathogens were taken from  [CLS] blood, urine and sputum of patients who accepted chemotherapy from years 2001 to 2005, then were isolated and identified. The susceptibility test was performed by disk diffusion method. The results showed that the total of 418 strains were detected. Gram-negative bacteria were the most common of nosocomial infection. Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterobacter cloacae [CLS] , E. coli account for the most of Gram negative- bacteria infection and most resistant to broad-spectrum penicillin, Acinetobacter baumannii showed a trend of increase. The ratios of gram positive", " of this study was to determine the changes of pathogens in hematological ward and susceptibility of patients received chemotherapy to antibiotics. The pathogens were taken from blood, urine and  [CLS] sputum of patients who accepted chemotherapy from years 2001 to 2005, then were isolated and identified. The susceptibility test was performed by disk diffusion method. The results showed that the total of 418 strains were detected. Gram-negative bacteria were the most common of nosocomial infection. Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterobacter cloacae [CLS] , E. coli account for the most of Gram negative- bacteria infection and most resistant to broad-spectrum penicillin, Acinetobacter baumannii showed a trend of increase. The ratios of gram positive", " study was to determine the changes of pathogens in hematological ward and susceptibility of patients received chemotherapy to antibiotics. The pathogens were taken from blood, urine and sputum of  [CLS] patients who accepted chemotherapy from years 2001 to 2005, then were isolated and identified. The susceptibility test was performed by disk diffusion method. The results showed that the total of 418 strains were detected. Gram-negative bacteria were the most common of nosocomial infection. Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterobacter cloacae [CLS] , E. coli account for the most of Gram negative- bacteria infection and most resistant to broad-spectrum penicillin, Acinetobacter baumannii showed a trend of increase. The ratios of gram positive"]]
["bb_train_58", [" test was performed by disk diffusion method. The results showed that the total of 418 strains were detected. Gram-negative bacteria were the most common of nosocomial infection. Pseudomonas aeruginosa,  [CLS] Enterobacter cloacae, E. coli account for the most of Gram negative- bacteria infection and most resistant to broad-spectrum penicillin [CLS] , Acinetobacter baumannii showed a trend of increase. The ratios of gram positive bacteria and fungi were increased slowly, mainly as Enterococcus and Candida. Enterococcus is the most common cause", " test was performed by disk diffusion method. The results showed that the total of 418 strains were detected. Gram-negative bacteria were the most common of nosocomial infection. Pseudomonas aeruginosa,  [CLS] Enterobacter cloacae, E. coli account for the most of Gram negative [CLS] - bacteria infection and most resistant to broad-spectrum penicillin, Acinetobacter baumannii showed a trend of increase. The ratios of gram positive bacteria and fungi were increased slowly, mainly as Enterococcus"]]
["bb_train_59", [" 2005].\nThe purpose of this study was to determine the changes of pathogens in hematological ward and susceptibility of patients received chemotherapy to antibiotics. The pathogens were taken from  [CLS] blood, urine and sputum of patients who accepted chemotherapy from years 2001 to 2005, then were isolated and identified. The susceptibility test was performed by disk diffusion method. The results showed that the total of 418 strains were detected. Gram-negative bacteria were the most common of nosocomial infection. Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterobacter cloacae, E. coli account for the most of Gram negative- bacteria infection and most resistant to broad-spectrum penicillin, Acinetobacter baumannii [CLS]  showed a trend of increase. The ratios of gram positive bacteria and fungi were increased slowly, mainly as Enterococcus and Candida. Enterococcus is the most common cause of Gram-positive", " of this study was to determine the changes of pathogens in hematological ward and susceptibility of patients received chemotherapy to antibiotics. The pathogens were taken from blood, urine and  [CLS] sputum of patients who accepted chemotherapy from years 2001 to 2005, then were isolated and identified. The susceptibility test was performed by disk diffusion method. The results showed that the total of 418 strains were detected. Gram-negative bacteria were the most common of nosocomial infection. Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterobacter cloacae, E. coli account for the most of Gram negative- bacteria infection and most resistant to broad-spectrum penicillin, Acinetobacter baumannii [CLS]  showed a trend of increase. The ratios of gram positive bacteria and fungi were increased slowly, mainly as Enterococcus and Candida. Enterococcus is the most common cause of Gram-positive", " study was to determine the changes of pathogens in hematological ward and susceptibility of patients received chemotherapy to antibiotics. The pathogens were taken from blood, urine and sputum of  [CLS] patients who accepted chemotherapy from years 2001 to 2005, then were isolated and identified. The susceptibility test was performed by disk diffusion method. The results showed that the total of 418 strains were detected. Gram-negative bacteria were the most common of nosocomial infection. Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterobacter cloacae, E. coli account for the most of Gram negative- bacteria infection and most resistant to broad-spectrum penicillin, Acinetobacter baumannii [CLS]  showed a trend of increase. The ratios of gram positive bacteria and fungi were increased slowly, mainly as Enterococcus and Candida. Enterococcus is the most common cause of Gram-positive", " and identified. The susceptibility test was performed by disk diffusion method. The results showed that the total of 418 strains were detected. Gram-negative bacteria were the most common of  [CLS] nosocomial infection. Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterobacter cloacae, E. coli account for the most of Gram negative- bacteria infection and most resistant to broad-spectrum penicillin, Acinetobacter baumannii [CLS]  showed a trend of increase. The ratios of gram positive bacteria and fungi were increased slowly, mainly as Enterococcus and Candida. Enterococcus is the most common cause of Gram-positive", "\nThe purpose of this study was to determine the changes of pathogens in hematological ward and susceptibility of patients received chemotherapy to antibiotics. The pathogens were taken from blood,  [CLS] urine and sputum of patients who accepted chemotherapy from years 2001 to 2005, then were isolated and identified. The susceptibility test was performed by disk diffusion method. The results showed that the total of 418 strains were detected. Gram-negative bacteria were the most common of nosocomial infection. Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterobacter cloacae, E. coli account for the most of Gram negative- bacteria infection and most resistant to broad-spectrum penicillin, Acinetobacter baumannii [CLS]  showed a trend of increase. The ratios of gram positive bacteria and fungi were increased slowly, mainly as Enterococcus and Candida. Enterococcus is the most common cause of Gram-positive"]]
["bb_train_60", ["\nThe purpose of this study was to determine the changes of pathogens in hematological ward and susceptibility of patients received chemotherapy to antibiotics. The pathogens were taken from blood,  [CLS] urine and sputum of patients who accepted chemotherapy from years 2001 to 2005, then were isolated and identified. The susceptibility test was performed by disk diffusion method. The results showed that the total of 418 strains were detected. Gram-negative bacteria were the most common of nosocomial infection. Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterobacter cloacae, E. coli account for the most of Gram negative- bacteria infection and most resistant to broad-spectrum penicillin, Acinetobacter baumannii showed a trend of increase. The ratios of gram positive bacteria and fungi were increased slowly, mainly as Enterococcus [CLS]  and Candida. Enterococcus is the most common cause of Gram-positive bacterial infection. Vancomycin resistance did not occur. It is concluded that Gram-negative bacteria are main cause of nosocomial infection", " 2005].\nThe purpose of this study was to determine the changes of pathogens in hematological ward and susceptibility of patients received chemotherapy to antibiotics. The pathogens were taken from  [CLS] blood, urine and sputum of patients who accepted chemotherapy from years 2001 to 2005, then were isolated and identified. The susceptibility test was performed by disk diffusion method. The results showed that the total of 418 strains were detected. Gram-negative bacteria were the most common of nosocomial infection. Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterobacter cloacae, E. coli account for the most of Gram negative- bacteria infection and most resistant to broad-spectrum penicillin, Acinetobacter baumannii showed a trend of increase. The ratios of gram positive bacteria and fungi were increased slowly, mainly as Enterococcus [CLS]  and Candida. Enterococcus is the most common cause of Gram-positive bacterial infection. Vancomycin resistance did not occur. It is concluded that Gram-negative bacteria are main cause of nosocomial infection", " study was to determine the changes of pathogens in hematological ward and susceptibility of patients received chemotherapy to antibiotics. The pathogens were taken from blood, urine and sputum of  [CLS] patients who accepted chemotherapy from years 2001 to 2005, then were isolated and identified. The susceptibility test was performed by disk diffusion method. The results showed that the total of 418 strains were detected. Gram-negative bacteria were the most common of nosocomial infection. Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterobacter cloacae, E. coli account for the most of Gram negative- bacteria infection and most resistant to broad-spectrum penicillin, Acinetobacter baumannii showed a trend of increase. The ratios of gram positive bacteria and fungi were increased slowly, mainly as Enterococcus [CLS]  and Candida. Enterococcus is the most common cause of Gram-positive bacterial infection. Vancomycin resistance did not occur. It is concluded that Gram-negative bacteria are main cause of nosocomial infection", " of this study was to determine the changes of pathogens in hematological ward and susceptibility of patients received chemotherapy to antibiotics. The pathogens were taken from blood, urine and  [CLS] sputum of patients who accepted chemotherapy from years 2001 to 2005, then were isolated and identified. The susceptibility test was performed by disk diffusion method. The results showed that the total of 418 strains were detected. Gram-negative bacteria were the most common of nosocomial infection. Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterobacter cloacae, E. coli account for the most of Gram negative- bacteria infection and most resistant to broad-spectrum penicillin, Acinetobacter baumannii showed a trend of increase. The ratios of gram positive bacteria and fungi were increased slowly, mainly as Enterococcus [CLS]  and Candida. Enterococcus is the most common cause of Gram-positive bacterial infection. Vancomycin resistance did not occur. It is concluded that Gram-negative bacteria are main cause of nosocomial infection", " and identified. The susceptibility test was performed by disk diffusion method. The results showed that the total of 418 strains were detected. Gram-negative bacteria were the most common of  [CLS] nosocomial infection. Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterobacter cloacae, E. coli account for the most of Gram negative- bacteria infection and most resistant to broad-spectrum penicillin, Acinetobacter baumannii showed a trend of increase. The ratios of gram positive bacteria and fungi were increased slowly, mainly as Enterococcus [CLS]  and Candida. Enterococcus is the most common cause of Gram-positive bacterial infection. Vancomycin resistance did not occur. It is concluded that Gram-negative bacteria are main cause of nosocomial infection", " methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE): a systematic review.\nNo published systematic reviews have assessed the natural history of colonization with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) or vancomycin-resistant  [CLS] Enterococcus (VRE). Time to clearance of colonization has important implications for patient [CLS]  care and infection control policy.\nWe performed parallel searches in OVID Medline for studies that reported the time to documented clearance of MRSA and VRE colonization in the absence"]]
["bb_train_61", [" Enterobacter cloacae, E. coli account for the most of Gram negative- bacteria infection and most resistant to broad-spectrum penicillin, Acinetobacter baumannii showed a trend of increase. The ratios of  [CLS] gram positive bacteria and fungi were increased slowly, mainly as Enterococcus [CLS]  and Candida. Enterococcus is the most common cause of Gram-positive bacterial infection. Vancomycin resistance did not occur. It is concluded that Gram-negative bacteria are main cause of nosocomial infection", " and most resistant to broad-spectrum penicillin, Acinetobacter baumannii showed a trend of increase. The ratios of gram positive bacteria and fungi were increased slowly, mainly as Enterococcus and Candida.  [CLS] Enterococcus is the most common cause of Gram-positive [CLS]  bacterial infection. Vancomycin resistance did not occur. It is concluded that Gram-negative bacteria are main cause of nosocomial infection in patients with hematological malignancies. Gram positive bacteria and fungi", " [CLS] vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus [CLS]  (VRE): a systematic review.\nNo published systematic reviews have assessed the natural history of colonization with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) or vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE). Time to clearance of colonization", " with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE): a systematic review.\nNo published systematic reviews have assessed the natural history of colonization with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) or  [CLS] vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus [CLS]  (VRE). Time to clearance of colonization has important implications for patient care and infection control policy.\nWe performed parallel searches in OVID Medline for studies that reported the time"]]
["bb_train_62", [" [CLS] Salmonella enterica in northern Spain [CLS]  with evidence of CTX-M-9 clonal spread among animals and humans.\nAmong the 1233 Salmonella enterica isolates obtained in two Spanish hospitals, five isolates (0.4%) (serovars: Virchow, four; Livingstone, one)"]]
["bb_train_63", [" [CLS] Salmonella enterica in northern Spain with evidence of CTX-M-9 clonal spread among animals [CLS]  and humans.\nAmong the 1233 Salmonella enterica isolates obtained in two Spanish hospitals, five isolates (0.4%) (serovars: Virchow, four; Livingstone, one) had the phenotype of an extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)", " [CLS] Salmonella enterica in northern Spain with evidence of CTX-M-9 clonal spread among animals and humans [CLS] .\nAmong the 1233 Salmonella enterica isolates obtained in two Spanish hospitals, five isolates (0.4%) (serovars: Virchow, four; Livingstone, one) had the phenotype of an extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) producer. The", " [CLS] Salmonella enterica isolates obtained in two Spanish hospitals [CLS] , five isolates (0.4%) (serovars: Virchow, four; Livingstone, one) had the phenotype of an extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) producer. The genetic characterization of the ESBL of S. enterica Livingstone revealed a"]]
["bb_train_64", [" [CLS] beta-lactamase-producing Salmonella enterica [CLS]  in northern Spain with evidence of CTX-M-9 clonal spread among animals and humans.\nAmong the 1233 Salmonella enterica isolates obtained in two Spanish hospitals, five isolates (0.4%) (serovars: Virchow,"]]
["bb_train_65", [" [CLS] Spanish hospitals, five isolates (0.4%) (serovars: Virchow [CLS] , four; Livingstone, one) had the phenotype of an extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) producer. The genetic characterization of the ESBL of S. enterica Livingstone revealed a bla(SHV-2) gene. The bla(CTX-M-10) gene"]]
["bb_train_66", [" enterica in northern Spain with evidence of CTX-M-9 clonal spread among animals and humans.\nAmong the 1233 Salmonella enterica isolates obtained in two Spanish hospitals, five isolates (0.4%) (serovars:  [CLS] Virchow, four; Livingstone, one) had the phenotype of an extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) producer [CLS] . The genetic characterization of the ESBL of S. enterica Livingstone revealed a bla(SHV-2) gene. The bla(CTX-M-10) gene in a phage-related genetic environment was found in one S. enterica Virchow"]]
["bb_train_67", [" [CLS] Spanish hospitals, five isolates (0.4%) (serovars: Virchow, four; Livingstone [CLS] , one) had the phenotype of an extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) producer. The genetic characterization of the ESBL of S. enterica Livingstone revealed a bla(SHV-2) gene. The bla(CTX-M-10) gene in a"]]
["bb_train_68", [" northern Spain with evidence of CTX-M-9 clonal spread among animals and humans.\nAmong the 1233 Salmonella enterica isolates obtained in two Spanish hospitals, five isolates (0.4%) (serovars: Virchow, four;  [CLS] Livingstone, one) had the phenotype of an extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) producer [CLS] . The genetic characterization of the ESBL of S. enterica Livingstone revealed a bla(SHV-2) gene. The bla(CTX-M-10) gene in a phage-related genetic environment was found in one S. enterica Virchow"]]
["bb_train_69", [" pulsed-field gel electrophoresis patterns among themselves and also as compared with the two other bla(CTX-M-9)-containing isolates previously obtained from animals. ESBL production is an emerging mechanism of resistance in  [CLS] S. enterica in the two studied hospitals [CLS] .\n\n"]]
["bb_train_70", [" by real-time PCR.\nWe aimed to detect causative pathogens in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) collected from patients diagnosed with bacterial meningitis by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). In addition to  [CLS] Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae described previously, five other pathogens, Neisseria meningitidis, Escherichia coli, Streptococcus agalactiae, Staphylococcus aureus, and Listeria monocytogenes, were targeted, based on a large-scale surveillance in Japan [CLS] . Results in CSF from neonates and children (n=150), and from adults (n=18) analyzed by real-time PCR with molecular beacon probes were compared with those of conventional culturing. The total"]]
["bb_train_71", [" PCR.\nWe aimed to detect causative pathogens in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) collected from patients diagnosed with bacterial meningitis by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). In addition to Streptococcus pneumoniae,  [CLS] Haemophilus influenzae, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae described previously, five other pathogens, Neisseria meningitidis, Escherichia coli, Streptococcus agalactiae, Staphylococcus aureus, and Listeria monocytogenes, were targeted, based on a large-scale surveillance in Japan [CLS] . Results in CSF from neonates and children (n=150), and from adults (n=18) analyzed by real-time PCR with molecular beacon probes were compared with those of conventional culturing. The total"]]
["bb_train_72", [" PCR.\nWe aimed to detect causative pathogens in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) collected from patients diagnosed with bacterial meningitis by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). In addition to Streptococcus pneumoniae,  [CLS] Haemophilus influenzae, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae described previously, five other pathogens [CLS] , Neisseria meningitidis, Escherichia coli, Streptococcus agalactiae, Staphylococcus aureus, and Listeria monocytogenes, were targeted, based on a large-scale surveillance in Japan. Results in CSF from neonates and children (n=150), and"]]
["bb_train_73", [" to detect causative pathogens in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) collected from patients diagnosed with bacterial meningitis by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). In addition to Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and  [CLS] Mycoplasma pneumoniae described previously, five other pathogens, Neisseria meningitidis, Escherichia coli, Streptococcus agalactiae, Staphylococcus aureus, and Listeria monocytogenes, were targeted, based on a large-scale surveillance in Japan [CLS] . Results in CSF from neonates and children (n=150), and from adults (n=18) analyzed by real-time PCR with molecular beacon probes were compared with those of conventional culturing. The total"]]
["bb_train_74", [" to detect causative pathogens in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) collected from patients diagnosed with bacterial meningitis by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). In addition to Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and  [CLS] Mycoplasma pneumoniae described previously, five other pathogens [CLS] , Neisseria meningitidis, Escherichia coli, Streptococcus agalactiae, Staphylococcus aureus, and Listeria monocytogenes, were targeted, based on a large-scale surveillance in Japan. Results in CSF from neonates and children (n=150), and"]]
["bb_train_75", [" (CSF) collected from patients diagnosed with bacterial meningitis by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). In addition to Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae described previously, five other pathogens,  [CLS] Neisseria meningitidis, Escherichia coli, Streptococcus agalactiae, Staphylococcus aureus, and Listeria monocytogenes, were targeted, based on a large-scale surveillance in Japan [CLS] . Results in CSF from neonates and children (n=150), and from adults (n=18) analyzed by real-time PCR with molecular beacon probes were compared with those of conventional culturing. The total"]]
["bb_train_76", [" fluid (CSF) collected from patients diagnosed with bacterial meningitis by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). In addition to Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae described previously, five other  [CLS] pathogens, Neisseria meningitidis [CLS] , Escherichia coli, Streptococcus agalactiae, Staphylococcus aureus, and Listeria monocytogenes, were targeted, based on a large-scale surveillance in Japan. Results in CSF from neonates and children (n=150), and from adults"]]
["bb_train_77", [" from patients diagnosed with bacterial meningitis by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). In addition to Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae described previously, five other pathogens, Neisseria meningitidis,  [CLS] Escherichia coli, Streptococcus agalactiae, Staphylococcus aureus, and Listeria monocytogenes, were targeted, based on a large-scale surveillance in Japan [CLS] . Results in CSF from neonates and children (n=150), and from adults (n=18) analyzed by real-time PCR with molecular beacon probes were compared with those of conventional culturing. The total"]]
["bb_train_78", [" diagnosed with bacterial meningitis by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). In addition to Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae described previously, five other pathogens, Neisseria meningitidis, Escherichia coli,  [CLS] Streptococcus agalactiae, Staphylococcus aureus, and Listeria monocytogenes, were targeted, based on a large-scale surveillance in Japan [CLS] . Results in CSF from neonates and children (n=150), and from adults (n=18) analyzed by real-time PCR with molecular beacon probes were compared with those of conventional culturing. The total"]]
["bb_train_79", [" fluid (CSF) collected from patients diagnosed with bacterial meningitis by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). In addition to Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae described previously, five other  [CLS] pathogens, Neisseria meningitidis, Escherichia coli, Streptococcus agalactiae [CLS] , Staphylococcus aureus, and Listeria monocytogenes, were targeted, based on a large-scale surveillance in Japan. Results in CSF from neonates and children (n=150), and from adults (n=18) analyzed by real-time"]]
["bb_train_80", [" bacterial meningitis by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). In addition to Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae described previously, five other pathogens, Neisseria meningitidis, Escherichia coli, Streptococcus agalactiae,  [CLS] Staphylococcus aureus, and Listeria monocytogenes, were targeted, based on a large-scale surveillance in Japan [CLS] . Results in CSF from neonates and children (n=150), and from adults (n=18) analyzed by real-time PCR with molecular beacon probes were compared with those of conventional culturing. The total"]]
["bb_train_81", [" real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). In addition to Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae described previously, five other pathogens, Neisseria meningitidis, Escherichia coli, Streptococcus agalactiae, Staphylococcus aureus, and  [CLS] Listeria monocytogenes, were targeted, based on a large-scale surveillance in Japan [CLS] . Results in CSF from neonates and children (n=150), and from adults (n=18) analyzed by real-time PCR with molecular beacon probes were compared with those of conventional culturing. The total"]]
["bb_train_82", [" fluid (CSF) collected from patients diagnosed with bacterial meningitis by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). In addition to Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae described previously, five other  [CLS] pathogens, Neisseria meningitidis, Escherichia coli, Streptococcus agalactiae, Staphylococcus aureus, and Listeria monocytogenes [CLS] , were targeted, based on a large-scale surveillance in Japan. Results in CSF from neonates and children (n=150), and from adults (n=18) analyzed by real-time PCR with molecular beacon probes"]]
["bb_train_83", [" detected in 72.0% of the samples by real-time PCR, but in only 48.2% by culture, although the microorganisms were completely concordant. With the real-time PCR, the detection rate of  [CLS] H. influenzae from CSF [CLS]  was high, at 45.2%, followed by S. pneumoniae (21.4%), S. agalactiae (2.4%), E. coli (1.8%), L. monocytogenes (0.6%), and M. pneumoniae (0.6%). The detection rate with PCR was significantly", " detected in 72.0% of the samples by real-time PCR, but in only 48.2% by culture, although the microorganisms were completely concordant. With the real-time PCR, the detection rate of  [CLS] H. influenzae from CSF was high, at 45.2%, followed by S. pneumoniae (21.4%), S. agalactiae (2.4%), E. coli (1.8%), L. monocytogenes (0.6%), and M. pneumoniae (0.6%). The detection rate with PCR was significantly better than that with cultures in patients with antibiotic administration [CLS]  (chi2=18.3182; P=0.0000). In conclusion, detection with real-time PCR is useful for rapidly identifying the causative pathogens of meningitis and for examining the clinical course of chemotherapy.\n\n"]]
["bb_train_84", [" of the samples by real-time PCR, but in only 48.2% by culture, although the microorganisms were completely concordant. With the real-time PCR, the detection rate of H. influenzae from  [CLS] CSF was high, at 45.2%, followed by S. pneumoniae [CLS]  (21.4%), S. agalactiae (2.4%), E. coli (1.8%), L. monocytogenes (0.6%), and M. pneumoniae (0.6%). The detection rate with PCR was significantly better than that with cultures in patients with", " in only 48.2% by culture, although the microorganisms were completely concordant. With the real-time PCR, the detection rate of H. influenzae from CSF was high, at 45.2%, followed by  [CLS] S. pneumoniae (21.4%), S. agalactiae (2.4%), E. coli (1.8%), L. monocytogenes (0.6%), and M. pneumoniae (0.6%). The detection rate with PCR was significantly better than that with cultures in patients with antibiotic administration [CLS]  (chi2=18.3182; P=0.0000). In conclusion, detection with real-time PCR is useful for rapidly identifying the causative pathogens of meningitis and for examining the clinical course of chemotherapy.\n\n"]]
["bb_train_85", [" by culture, although the microorganisms were completely concordant. With the real-time PCR, the detection rate of H. influenzae from CSF was high, at 45.2%, followed by S. pneumoniae (21.4%),  [CLS] S. agalactiae (2.4%), E. coli (1.8%), L. monocytogenes (0.6%), and M. pneumoniae (0.6%). The detection rate with PCR was significantly better than that with cultures in patients with antibiotic administration [CLS]  (chi2=18.3182; P=0.0000). In conclusion, detection with real-time PCR is useful for rapidly identifying the causative pathogens of meningitis and for examining the clinical course of chemotherapy.\n\n", " of the samples by real-time PCR, but in only 48.2% by culture, although the microorganisms were completely concordant. With the real-time PCR, the detection rate of H. influenzae from  [CLS] CSF was high, at 45.2%, followed by S. pneumoniae (21.4%), S. agalactiae [CLS]  (2.4%), E. coli (1.8%), L. monocytogenes (0.6%), and M. pneumoniae (0.6%). The detection rate with PCR was significantly better than that with cultures in patients with antibiotic administration (chi2=18.3182;"]]
["bb_train_86", [" of the samples by real-time PCR, but in only 48.2% by culture, although the microorganisms were completely concordant. With the real-time PCR, the detection rate of H. influenzae from  [CLS] CSF was high, at 45.2%, followed by S. pneumoniae (21.4%), S. agalactiae (2.4%), E. coli (1.8%), L. monocytogenes [CLS]  (0.6%), and M. pneumoniae (0.6%). The detection rate with PCR was significantly better than that with cultures in patients with antibiotic administration (chi2=18.3182; P=0.0000). In conclusion, detection with real-time", " completely concordant. With the real-time PCR, the detection rate of H. influenzae from CSF was high, at 45.2%, followed by S. pneumoniae (21.4%), S. agalactiae (2.4%), E. coli (1.8%),  [CLS] L. monocytogenes (0.6%), and M. pneumoniae (0.6%). The detection rate with PCR was significantly better than that with cultures in patients with antibiotic administration [CLS]  (chi2=18.3182; P=0.0000). In conclusion, detection with real-time PCR is useful for rapidly identifying the causative pathogens of meningitis and for examining the clinical course of chemotherapy.\n\n"]]
["bb_train_87", [" of the samples by real-time PCR, but in only 48.2% by culture, although the microorganisms were completely concordant. With the real-time PCR, the detection rate of H. influenzae from  [CLS] CSF was high, at 45.2%, followed by S. pneumoniae (21.4%), S. agalactiae (2.4%), E. coli (1.8%), L. monocytogenes (0.6%), and M. pneumoniae [CLS]  (0.6%). The detection rate with PCR was significantly better than that with cultures in patients with antibiotic administration (chi2=18.3182; P=0.0000). In conclusion, detection with real-time PCR is useful for", " real-time PCR, the detection rate of H. influenzae from CSF was high, at 45.2%, followed by S. pneumoniae (21.4%), S. agalactiae (2.4%), E. coli (1.8%), L. monocytogenes (0.6%), and  [CLS] M. pneumoniae (0.6%). The detection rate with PCR was significantly better than that with cultures in patients with antibiotic administration [CLS]  (chi2=18.3182; P=0.0000). In conclusion, detection with real-time PCR is useful for rapidly identifying the causative pathogens of meningitis and for examining the clinical course of chemotherapy.\n\n"]]
["bb_train_88", [" result, for many pathogenic bacteria, Fur plays a crucial role in the course of infection and disease development. In this study, the fur gene was cloned from a pathogenic  [CLS] Pseudomonas fluorescens strain, TSS, isolated from diseased Japanese flounder cultured in a local farm [CLS] . TSS Fur can partially complement the defective phenotype of an Escherichia coli fur mutant. A TSS fur null mutant, TFM, was constructed. Compared to TSS, TFM exhibits reduced growth", " result, for many pathogenic bacteria, Fur plays a crucial role in the course of infection and disease development. In this study, the fur gene was cloned from a pathogenic  [CLS] Pseudomonas fluorescens strain, TSS, isolated from diseased Japanese flounder cultured in a local farm [CLS] . TSS Fur can partially complement the defective phenotype of an Escherichia coli fur mutant. A TSS fur null mutant, TFM, was constructed. Compared to TSS, TFM exhibits reduced growth"]]
["bb_train_89", [" a result, for many pathogenic bacteria, Fur plays a crucial role in the course of infection and disease development. In this study, the fur gene was cloned from a  [CLS] pathogenic Pseudomonas fluorescens strain, TSS [CLS] , isolated from diseased Japanese flounder cultured in a local farm. TSS Fur can partially complement the defective phenotype of an Escherichia coli fur mutant. A TSS fur null mutant,"]]
["bb_train_90", [" in a local farm. TSS Fur can partially complement the defective phenotype of an Escherichia coli fur mutant. A TSS fur null mutant, TFM, was constructed. Compared to TSS,  [CLS] TFM exhibits reduced growth ability, aberrant production of outer membrane proteins, decreased resistance against host serum [CLS]  bactericidal activity, impaired ability to disseminate in host blood and tissues, and drastic attenuation in overall bacterial virulence in a Japanese flounder infection model. When used as a live", " in a local farm. TSS Fur can partially complement the defective phenotype of an Escherichia coli fur mutant. A TSS fur null mutant, TFM, was constructed. Compared to TSS,  [CLS] TFM exhibits reduced growth ability, aberrant production of outer membrane proteins, decreased resistance against host serum bactericidal activity, impaired ability to disseminate in host blood and tissues, and drastic attenuation in overall bacterial virulence in a Japanese flounder [CLS]  infection model. When used as a live vaccine administered via the injection, immersion, and oral routes, TFM affords high levels of protection upon Japanese flounder against not only P.", " and tissues, and drastic attenuation in overall bacterial virulence in a Japanese flounder infection model. When used as a live vaccine administered via the injection, immersion, and oral routes,  [CLS] TFM affords high levels of protection upon Japanese flounder [CLS]  against not only P. fluorescens infection but also Aeromonas hydrophila infection. Furthermore, a plasmid, pJAQ, was constructed, which expresses the coding element of the Vibrio harveyi antigen AgaV-DegQ. TFM", " serum bactericidal activity, impaired ability to disseminate in host blood and tissues, and drastic attenuation in overall bacterial virulence in a Japanese flounder infection model. When used as a  [CLS] live vaccine administered via the injection, immersion, and oral routes, TFM [CLS]  affords high levels of protection upon Japanese flounder against not only P. fluorescens infection but also Aeromonas hydrophila infection. Furthermore, a plasmid, pJAQ, was constructed, which expresses the coding", " Furthermore, a plasmid, pJAQ, was constructed, which expresses the coding element of the Vibrio harveyi antigen AgaV-DegQ. TFM harboring pJAQ can secret AgaV-DegQ into the extracellular milieu. Vaccination of  [CLS] Japanese flounder with live TFM [CLS] /pJAQ elicited strong immunoprotection against both V. harveyi and A. hydrophila infections.\n\n"]]
["bb_train_91", [" in a local farm. TSS Fur can partially complement the defective phenotype of an Escherichia coli fur mutant. A TSS fur null mutant, TFM, was constructed. Compared to TSS,  [CLS] TFM exhibits reduced growth ability, aberrant production of outer membrane proteins, decreased resistance against host serum bactericidal activity [CLS] , impaired ability to disseminate in host blood and tissues, and drastic attenuation in overall bacterial virulence in a Japanese flounder infection model. When used as a live vaccine administered"]]
["bb_train_92", [" activation, has been identified as a key regulator of Schwann cell proliferation, differentiation, demyelination and nerve regeneration. Recent studies have provided evidence that the bacterium that causes human leprosy,  [CLS] Mycobacterium leprae that has a unique capacity to invade Schwann cells of the adult PNS [CLS] , utilizes the neuregulin-ErbB2/ErbB3 associated signaling network to the bacterial advantage. M. leprae directly bind to ErbB2 on myelinated Schwann cells and activate the RTK by a novel route that", " activation, has been identified as a key regulator of Schwann cell proliferation, differentiation, demyelination and nerve regeneration. Recent studies have provided evidence that the bacterium that causes human leprosy,  [CLS] Mycobacterium leprae that has a unique capacity to invade Schwann cells of the adult PNS [CLS] , utilizes the neuregulin-ErbB2/ErbB3 associated signaling network to the bacterial advantage. M. leprae directly bind to ErbB2 on myelinated Schwann cells and activate the RTK by a novel route that", " activation, has been identified as a key regulator of Schwann cell proliferation, differentiation, demyelination and nerve regeneration. Recent studies have provided evidence that the bacterium that causes human leprosy,  [CLS] Mycobacterium leprae that has a unique capacity to invade Schwann cells of the adult [CLS]  PNS, utilizes the neuregulin-ErbB2/ErbB3 associated signaling network to the bacterial advantage. M. leprae directly bind to ErbB2 on myelinated Schwann cells and activate the RTK by a novel route", " of neuregulin-ErbB2/ErbB3 activation, has been identified as a key regulator of Schwann cell proliferation, differentiation, demyelination and nerve regeneration. Recent studies have provided evidence that the bacterium that causes  [CLS] human leprosy, Mycobacterium leprae [CLS]  that has a unique capacity to invade Schwann cells of the adult PNS, utilizes the neuregulin-ErbB2/ErbB3 associated signaling network to the bacterial advantage. M. leprae directly bind to ErbB2"]]
["bb_train_93", [" that causes human leprosy, Mycobacterium leprae that has a unique capacity to invade Schwann cells of the adult PNS, utilizes the neuregulin-ErbB2/ErbB3 associated signaling network to the bacterial advantage.  [CLS] M. leprae directly bind to ErbB2 on myelinated Schwann cells [CLS]  and activate the RTK by a novel route that bypasses the classical neuregulin/growth factor-induced ErbB2-ErbB3 heterodimerization, and subsequently induce downstream the canonical Erk1/2 signaling, leading to myelin breakdown and", " downstream the canonical Erk1/2 signaling, leading to myelin breakdown and subsequent axonal damage. This initial injury provides a survival advantage for M. leprae as it induces de-differentiation and generates  [CLS] myelin-free cells, which are highly susceptible to M. leprae [CLS]  invasion and promote bacterial survival. Once invaded M. leprae activate Erk1/2 via a non-canonical pathway and subsequently increase the cell proliferation and maintain the infected cells in de-differentiated state,", " provides a survival advantage for M. leprae as it induces de-differentiation and generates myelin-free cells, which are highly susceptible to M. leprae invasion and promote bacterial survival. Once invaded  [CLS] M. leprae activate Erk1/2 via a non-canonical pathway and subsequently increase the cell proliferation and maintain the infected cells [CLS]  in de-differentiated state, thereby preventing remyelination. Therefore, by subverting major RTKs and signaling pathways in adult Schwann cells M. leprae appear to propagate the bacterial niche and maintain survival", " provides a survival advantage for M. leprae as it induces de-differentiation and generates myelin-free cells, which are highly susceptible to M. leprae invasion and promote bacterial survival. Once invaded  [CLS] M. leprae activate Erk1/2 via a non-canonical pathway and subsequently increase the cell [CLS]  proliferation and maintain the infected cells in de-differentiated state, thereby preventing remyelination. Therefore, by subverting major RTKs and signaling pathways in adult Schwann cells M. leprae appear to propagate", " and subsequently increase the cell proliferation and maintain the infected cells in de-differentiated state, thereby preventing remyelination. Therefore, by subverting major RTKs and signaling pathways in adult Schwann cells  [CLS] M. leprae appear to propagate the bacterial niche and maintain survival within the PNS [CLS] . These studies may also provide new insights into our understanding of signaling mechanisms involve in both neurodegeneration and neuroregeneration.\n\n", " a non-canonical pathway and subsequently increase the cell proliferation and maintain the infected cells in de-differentiated state, thereby preventing remyelination. Therefore, by subverting major RTKs and signaling pathways in  [CLS] adult Schwann cells M. leprae [CLS]  appear to propagate the bacterial niche and maintain survival within the PNS. These studies may also provide new insights into our understanding of signaling mechanisms involve in both neurodegeneration"]]
["bb_train_94", [" [CLS] Francisella tularensis LVS in murine macrophage-like cell line J774 [CLS] .\nFrancisella tularensis, a causative agent of human tularemia, displaying the ability to proliferate inside the human cells.\nTo evaluate the growth potential of F. tularensis LVS strain in macrophage-like"]]
["bb_train_95", [" [CLS] Francisella tularensis, a causative agent of human [CLS]  tularemia, displaying the ability to proliferate inside the human cells.\nTo evaluate the growth potential of F. tularensis LVS strain in macrophage-like cell line J774 modulated by recombinant interferon", " [CLS] Francisella tularensis, a causative agent of human tularemia, displaying the ability to proliferate inside the human [CLS]  cells.\nTo evaluate the growth potential of F. tularensis LVS strain in macrophage-like cell line J774 modulated by recombinant interferon gamma and E. coli derived lipopolysaccharide.\nStimulation of J774", " [CLS] Francisella tularensis, a causative agent of human tularemia, displaying the ability to proliferate inside the human cells [CLS] .\nTo evaluate the growth potential of F. tularensis LVS strain in macrophage-like cell line J774 modulated by recombinant interferon gamma and E. coli derived lipopolysaccharide.\nStimulation of J774 cells"]]
["bb_train_96", [" [CLS] Francisella tularensis, a causative agent of human tularemia, displaying the ability to proliferate inside the human cells [CLS] .\nTo evaluate the growth potential of F. tularensis LVS strain in macrophage-like cell line J774 modulated by recombinant interferon gamma and E. coli derived lipopolysaccharide.\nStimulation of J774 cells", " [CLS] Francisella tularensis, a causative agent of human tularemia [CLS] , displaying the ability to proliferate inside the human cells.\nTo evaluate the growth potential of F. tularensis LVS strain in macrophage-like cell line J774 modulated by recombinant interferon gamma"]]
["bb_train_97", [" in murine macrophage-like cell line J774.\nFrancisella tularensis, a causative agent of human tularemia, displaying the ability to proliferate inside the human cells.\nTo evaluate the growth potential of  [CLS] F. tularensis LVS strain in macrophage-like cell line J774 [CLS]  modulated by recombinant interferon gamma and E. coli derived lipopolysaccharide.\nStimulation of J774 cells either by interferon-gamma or lipopolysaccharide alone, or especially in combination before infection F. tularensis, revealed"]]
["bb_train_98", [" human cells.\nTo evaluate the growth potential of F. tularensis LVS strain in macrophage-like cell line J774 modulated by recombinant interferon gamma and E. coli derived lipopolysaccharide.\nStimulation of  [CLS] J774 cells either by interferon-gamma or lipopolysaccharide alone, or especially in combination before infection F. tularensis [CLS] , revealed protective effects. Higher concentrations of stimulating agents were needed to inhibit ongoing F. tularensis infection.\nStimulation of J774 cell line by combination of interferon-gamma with lipopolysaccharide inhibits the", " or lipopolysaccharide alone, or especially in combination before infection F. tularensis, revealed protective effects. Higher concentrations of stimulating agents were needed to inhibit ongoing F. tularensis infection.\nStimulation of  [CLS] J774 cell line by combination of interferon-gamma with lipopolysaccharide inhibits the intracellular growth of F. tularensis [CLS] .\n\n"]]
["bb_train_99", [" host defences, allowing the pathogens to establish infection. Although Yersinia pseudotuberculosis delivers its effector proteins, called Yops, into numerous cell types grown in culture, we show that during infection  [CLS] Y. pseudotuberculosis selectively targets Yops to professional phagocytes in Peyer's patches, mesenteric lymph nodes [CLS]  and spleen, although it colocalizes with B and T cells as well as professional phagocytes. Strikingly, in the absence of neutrophils, the number of cells with translocated Yops was", " host defences, allowing the pathogens to establish infection. Although Yersinia pseudotuberculosis delivers its effector proteins, called Yops, into numerous cell types grown in culture, we show that during infection  [CLS] Y. pseudotuberculosis selectively targets Yops to professional phagocytes in Peyer's patches, mesenteric lymph nodes and spleen [CLS] , although it colocalizes with B and T cells as well as professional phagocytes. Strikingly, in the absence of neutrophils, the number of cells with translocated Yops was significantly reduced", " host defences, allowing the pathogens to establish infection. Although Yersinia pseudotuberculosis delivers its effector proteins, called Yops, into numerous cell types grown in culture, we show that during infection  [CLS] Y. pseudotuberculosis selectively targets Yops to professional phagocytes in Peyer's patches [CLS] , mesenteric lymph nodes and spleen, although it colocalizes with B and T cells as well as professional phagocytes. Strikingly, in the absence of neutrophils, the number of cells with"]]
["bb_train_100", [" [CLS] Vibrio fischeri, a bioluminescent marine [CLS]  bacterium, exists in an exclusive symbiotic relationship with the Hawaiian bobtail squid, Euprymna scolopes, whose light organ it colonizes. Previously, it has been shown that the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or", " [CLS] Vibrio fischeri, a bioluminescent marine bacterium, exists in an exclusive symbiotic relationship with the Hawaiian bobtail squid, Euprymna scolopes [CLS] , whose light organ it colonizes. Previously, it has been shown that the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or free lipid A of V. fischeri can trigger morphological changes in the juvenile squid's", " [CLS] Vibrio fischeri, a bioluminescent marine bacterium, exists in an exclusive symbiotic relationship with the Hawaiian bobtail squid [CLS] , Euprymna scolopes, whose light organ it colonizes. Previously, it has been shown that the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or free lipid A of V. fischeri can trigger morphological changes in the", " [CLS] Vibrio fischeri, a bioluminescent marine bacterium, exists in an exclusive symbiotic relationship with the Hawaiian bobtail squid, Euprymna scolopes, whose light organ [CLS]  it colonizes. Previously, it has been shown that the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or free lipid A of V. fischeri can trigger morphological changes in the juvenile squid's light organ that"]]
["bb_train_101", [" [CLS] Vibrio fischeri, a bioluminescent [CLS]  marine bacterium, exists in an exclusive symbiotic relationship with the Hawaiian bobtail squid, Euprymna scolopes, whose light organ it colonizes. Previously, it has been shown that the lipopolysaccharide (LPS)", " [CLS] Vibrio fischeri, a bioluminescent marine bacterium, exists in an exclusive symbiotic relationship [CLS]  with the Hawaiian bobtail squid, Euprymna scolopes, whose light organ it colonizes. Previously, it has been shown that the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or free lipid A of V. fischeri can"]]
["bb_train_102", [" exclusive symbiotic relationship with the Hawaiian bobtail squid, Euprymna scolopes, whose light organ it colonizes. Previously, it has been shown that the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or free lipid A of  [CLS] V. fischeri can trigger morphological changes in the juvenile squid's light organ [CLS]  that occur upon colonization. To investigate the structural features that might be responsible for this phenomenon, the lipid A from V. fischeri ES114 LPS was isolated and characterized by", " C12:0, C16:0, or C16:1), or phosphatidic acid (GroP bearing either C16:0 + C12:0 or C16:0 + C16:1). Given their unusual nature, it is possible that these features of the  [CLS] V. fischeri lipid A may underlie the ability of E. scolopes [CLS]  to recognize its symbiotic partner.\n\n"]]
["bb_train_103", [" C12:0, C16:0, or C16:1), or phosphatidic acid (GroP bearing either C16:0 + C12:0 or C16:0 + C16:1). Given their unusual nature, it is possible that these features of the  [CLS] V. fischeri lipid A may underlie the ability of E. scolopes to recognize its symbiotic [CLS]  partner.\n\n"]]
["bb_train_104", [" [CLS] Helicobactor pylori infection in children [CLS] ].\nTo study the value of multiple Helicobacter pylori (H.pylori) antibody detection by protein array in the diagnosis of H.pylori infection in children.\nBiopsy specimens obtained by gastroscopy from 120"]]
["bb_train_105", [" protein array in the diagnosis of Helicobactor pylori infection in children].\nTo study the value of multiple Helicobacter pylori (H.pylori) antibody detection by protein array in the diagnosis of  [CLS] H.pylori infection in children [CLS] .\nBiopsy specimens obtained by gastroscopy from 120 children with digestive system symptoms were detected by rapid urease test (RUT) and modified Giemsa staining. Positivity in both RUT and Giemsa", " and the antibodies against cytotoxin associated gene A protein (CagA), vacuolating toxin A (VacA), urease, heat shock protein 60 (Hsp60) and RdxA (nitroreductase) were detected by protein array technique.\n [CLS] H.pylori infection was identified according to the \"gold criterion\" in 60 children [CLS] . Compared with the \"gold criterion\", the goodness of fit and the coefficient of contingency in the diagnosis of H.pylori infection of the following four groups antibody detection were all"]]
["bb_train_106", [" on the course of a Clostridium perfringens infection applying a necrotic enteritis disease model.\nThe aerial parts of the plant Artemisia annua contain essential oils having antimicrobial properties against  [CLS] Clostridium perfringens Type A, the causal agent for necrotic enteritis in broilers [CLS] . In two experiments, the influence of increasing dietary concentrations of dried A. annua leaves (0, 5, 10 and 20 g/kg) and n-hexane extract from fresh A. annua leaves (0,"]]
["bb_train_107", [" annua leaves (10 g/kg on top) or n-hexane extract of A. annua (250 mg/kg) on the severity of the disease in broilers. The addition of n-hexane extract reduced the  [CLS] intestinal C. perfringens [CLS]  numbers and the severity of the disease-related small intestinal lesions. Over the infection period from day 17 to day 27, birds supplemented with the n-hexane extract gained more weight"]]
["bb_train_108", [" [CLS] Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) can cause life-threatening complications. Severe-complicated CDI is characterized by hypotension, shock, sepsis, ileus, megacolon, and colon perforation. We created a model to identify clinical factors associated with severe-complicated CDI.\nWe analyzed data from 1446 inpatient cases of CDI (48.6% female; median age, 62.5 years; range, 0.1-103.7 years) at the Mayo Clinic from June 28, 2007, to June 25, 2010. Patients with severe-complicated CDI (n = 487) were identified as those who required admission to the intensive care unit or colectomy, or died, within 30 days of CDI diagnosis. Logistic regression models were used to identify variables that were independently associated with the occurrence of severe-complicated CDI in 2 cohorts. One cohort comprised all hospitalized patients; the other comprised a subset of these inpatients [CLS]  who were residents of Olmsted County, Minnesota to assess the association of comorbid conditions with the development of severe-complicated infection in a population-based cohort. The linear combinations of variables", " [CLS] Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) can cause life-threatening complications. Severe-complicated CDI is characterized by hypotension, shock, sepsis, ileus, megacolon, and colon perforation. We created a model to identify clinical factors associated with severe-complicated CDI.\nWe analyzed data from 1446 inpatient cases of CDI (48.6% female; median age, 62.5 years; range, 0.1-103.7 years) at the Mayo Clinic from June 28, 2007, to June 25, 2010. Patients with severe-complicated CDI [CLS]  (n = 487) were identified as those who required admission to the intensive care unit or colectomy, or died, within 30 days of CDI diagnosis. Logistic regression models were", " [CLS] Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) can cause life-threatening complications. Severe-complicated CDI is characterized by hypotension, shock, sepsis, ileus, megacolon, and colon perforation. We created a model to identify clinical factors associated with severe-complicated CDI.\nWe analyzed data from 1446 inpatient cases of CDI (48.6% female; median age, 62.5 years; range, 0.1-103.7 years) at the Mayo Clinic from June 28, 2007, to June 25, 2010. Patients with severe-complicated CDI (n = 487) were identified as those who required admission to the intensive care unit or colectomy, or died, within 30 days of CDI diagnosis. Logistic regression models were used to identify variables that were independently associated with the occurrence of severe-complicated CDI in 2 cohorts. One cohort comprised all hospitalized patients; the other comprised a subset of these inpatients who were residents of Olmsted County, Minnesota to assess the association of comorbid conditions with the development of severe-complicated infection in a population-based cohort. The linear combinations of variables identified by using logistic regression models provided scores to predict the risk of developing severe-complicated CDI.\nIn a multivariable model that included all inpatients [CLS] , increasing age, leukocyte count >15 \u00d7 10(9)/L, increase in serum level of creatinine >1.5-fold from baseline, and use of proton pump inhibitors or narcotic medications were independently associated with", " [CLS] Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) can cause life-threatening complications. Severe-complicated CDI is characterized by hypotension, shock, sepsis, ileus, megacolon, and colon perforation. We created a model to identify clinical factors associated with severe-complicated CDI.\nWe analyzed data from 1446 inpatient cases of CDI (48.6% female; median age, 62.5 years; range, 0.1-103.7 years) [CLS]  at the Mayo Clinic from June 28, 2007, to June 25, 2010. Patients with severe-complicated CDI (n = 487) were identified as those who required admission to the intensive", " [CLS] Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) can cause life-threatening complications. Severe-complicated CDI is characterized by hypotension, shock, sepsis, ileus, megacolon, and colon perforation. We created a model to identify clinical factors associated with severe-complicated CDI.\nWe analyzed data from 1446 inpatient cases of CDI (48.6% female; median age, 62.5 years; range, 0.1-103.7 years) at the Mayo Clinic from June 28, 2007, to June 25, 2010. Patients with severe-complicated CDI (n = 487) were identified as those who required admission to the intensive care unit or colectomy, or died, within 30 days of CDI diagnosis. Logistic regression models were used to identify variables that were independently associated with the occurrence of severe-complicated CDI in 2 cohorts. One cohort comprised all hospitalized patients [CLS] ; the other comprised a subset of these inpatients who were residents of Olmsted County, Minnesota to assess the association of comorbid conditions with the development of severe-complicated infection in", " [CLS] Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) can cause life-threatening complications. Severe-complicated CDI is characterized by hypotension, shock, sepsis, ileus, megacolon, and colon perforation. We created a model to identify clinical factors associated with severe-complicated CDI.\nWe analyzed data from 1446 inpatient cases of CDI (48.6% female; median age, 62.5 years; range, 0.1-103.7 years) at the Mayo Clinic from June 28, 2007, to June 25, 2010. Patients with severe-complicated CDI (n = 487) were identified as those who required admission to the intensive care unit or colectomy, or died, within 30 days of CDI diagnosis. Logistic regression models were used to identify variables that were independently associated with the occurrence of severe-complicated CDI in 2 cohorts. One cohort comprised all hospitalized patients; the other comprised a subset of these inpatients who were residents of Olmsted County, Minnesota to assess the association of comorbid conditions with the development of severe-complicated infection in a population-based cohort. The linear combinations of variables identified by using logistic regression models provided scores to predict the risk of developing severe-complicated CDI.\nIn a multivariable model that included all inpatients, increasing age, leukocyte count >15 \u00d7 10(9)/L, increase in serum level of creatinine >1.5-fold from baseline, and use of proton pump inhibitors or narcotic medications were independently associated with severe-complicated CDI. In the secondary analysis, which included only patients from Olmsted County, comorbid conditions were not significantly associated with severe-complicated CDI.\nOlder age, high numbers of leukocytes in blood samples, an increased serum level of creatinine, gastric acid suppression, and use of narcotic medications were independently associated with development of severe-complicated CDI in hospitalized patients [CLS] . Early aggressive monitoring and intervention could improve outcomes.\n\n", " [CLS] Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) can cause life-threatening complications. Severe-complicated CDI is characterized by hypotension, shock, sepsis, ileus, megacolon, and colon perforation. We created a model to identify clinical factors associated with severe-complicated CDI.\nWe analyzed data from 1446 inpatient cases of CDI (48.6% female; median age, 62.5 years; range, 0.1-103.7 years) at the Mayo Clinic from June 28, 2007, to June 25, 2010. Patients with severe-complicated CDI (n = 487) were identified as those who required admission to the intensive care unit or colectomy, or died, within 30 days of CDI diagnosis. Logistic regression models were used to identify variables that were independently associated with the occurrence of severe-complicated CDI in 2 cohorts. One cohort comprised all hospitalized patients; the other comprised a subset of these inpatients who were residents of Olmsted County, Minnesota to assess the association of comorbid conditions with the development of severe-complicated infection in a population-based cohort. The linear combinations of variables identified by using logistic regression models provided scores to predict the risk of developing severe-complicated CDI.\nIn a multivariable model that included all inpatients, increasing age, leukocyte count >15 \u00d7 10(9)/L, increase in serum level of creatinine >1.5-fold from baseline, and use of proton pump inhibitors or narcotic medications were independently associated with severe-complicated CDI. In the secondary analysis, which included only patients [CLS]  from Olmsted County, comorbid conditions were not significantly associated with severe-complicated CDI.\nOlder age, high numbers of leukocytes in blood samples, an increased serum level of creatinine, gastric acid"]]
["bb_train_109", [" [CLS] Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) can cause life-threatening complications. Severe-complicated CDI is characterized by hypotension, shock, sepsis, ileus, megacolon, and colon perforation. We created a model to identify clinical factors associated with severe-complicated CDI.\nWe analyzed data from 1446 inpatient cases of CDI (48.6% female; median age, 62.5 years; range, 0.1-103.7 years) at the Mayo Clinic from June 28, 2007, to June 25, 2010. Patients with severe-complicated CDI (n = 487) were identified as those who required admission to the intensive care unit or colectomy, or died, within 30 days of CDI diagnosis. Logistic regression models were used to identify variables that were independently associated with the occurrence of severe-complicated CDI in 2 cohorts. One cohort comprised all hospitalized patients; the other comprised a subset of these inpatients who were residents of Olmsted County, Minnesota [CLS]  to assess the association of comorbid conditions with the development of severe-complicated infection in a population-based cohort. The linear combinations of variables identified by using logistic regression models provided", " [CLS] Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) can cause life-threatening complications. Severe-complicated CDI is characterized by hypotension, shock, sepsis, ileus, megacolon, and colon perforation. We created a model to identify clinical factors associated with severe-complicated CDI.\nWe analyzed data from 1446 inpatient cases of CDI (48.6% female; median age, 62.5 years; range, 0.1-103.7 years) at the Mayo Clinic from June 28, 2007, to June 25, 2010. Patients with severe-complicated CDI (n = 487) were identified as those who required admission to the intensive care unit or colectomy, or died, within 30 days of CDI diagnosis. Logistic regression models were used to identify variables that were independently associated with the occurrence of severe-complicated CDI in 2 cohorts. One cohort comprised all hospitalized patients; the other comprised a subset of these inpatients who were residents of Olmsted County, Minnesota to assess the association of comorbid conditions with the development of severe-complicated infection in a population-based cohort. The linear combinations of variables identified by using logistic regression models provided scores to predict the risk of developing severe-complicated CDI.\nIn a multivariable model that included all inpatients, increasing age, leukocyte count >15 \u00d7 10(9)/L, increase in serum level of creatinine >1.5-fold from baseline, and use of proton pump inhibitors or narcotic medications were independently associated with severe-complicated CDI. In the secondary analysis, which included only patients from Olmsted County [CLS] , comorbid conditions were not significantly associated with severe-complicated CDI.\nOlder age, high numbers of leukocytes in blood samples, an increased serum level of creatinine, gastric acid suppression, and use", " [CLS] Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) can cause life-threatening complications. Severe-complicated CDI is characterized by hypotension, shock, sepsis, ileus, megacolon, and colon perforation. We created a model to identify clinical factors associated with severe-complicated CDI.\nWe analyzed data from 1446 inpatient cases of CDI (48.6% female; median age, 62.5 years; range, 0.1-103.7 years) at the Mayo Clinic from June 28, 2007, to June 25, 2010. Patients with severe-complicated CDI (n = 487) were identified as those who required admission to the intensive care unit or colectomy, or died, within 30 days of CDI diagnosis. Logistic regression models were used to identify variables that were independently associated with the occurrence of severe-complicated CDI in 2 cohorts. One cohort comprised all hospitalized patients; the other comprised a subset of these inpatients who were residents of Olmsted County [CLS] , Minnesota to assess the association of comorbid conditions with the development of severe-complicated infection in a population-based cohort. The linear combinations of variables identified by using logistic regression models"]]
["bb_train_110", [" [CLS] Campylobacter isolates from UK [CLS]  retail poultry and evidence for clonal expansion of resistant lineages.\nAntimicrobial resistance is increasing among clinical Campylobacter cases and is common among isolates from other sources, specifically retail poultry", " cases and is common among isolates from other sources, specifically retail poultry - a major source of human infection. In this study the antimicrobial susceptibility of isolates from a  [CLS] UK-wide survey of Campylobacter [CLS]  in retail poultry in 2001 and 2004-5 was investigated. The occurrence of phenotypes resistant to tetracycline, quinolones (ciprofloxacin and naladixic acid), erythromycin, chloramphenicol and aminoglycosides was quantified. This was"]]
["bb_train_111", [" [CLS] Campylobacter isolates from UK retail poultry [CLS]  and evidence for clonal expansion of resistant lineages.\nAntimicrobial resistance is increasing among clinical Campylobacter cases and is common among isolates from other sources, specifically retail poultry - a", " [CLS] Campylobacter cases and is common among isolates from other sources, specifically retail poultry - a major source of human [CLS]  infection. In this study the antimicrobial susceptibility of isolates from a UK-wide survey of Campylobacter in retail poultry in 2001 and 2004-5 was investigated. The occurrence of phenotypes resistant", " [CLS] clinical Campylobacter [CLS]  cases and is common among isolates from other sources, specifically retail poultry - a major source of human infection. In this study the antimicrobial susceptibility of isolates from a", " [CLS] Campylobacter cases and is common among isolates from other sources, specifically retail poultry [CLS]  - a major source of human infection. In this study the antimicrobial susceptibility of isolates from a UK-wide survey of Campylobacter in retail poultry in 2001 and 2004-5 was", " common among isolates from other sources, specifically retail poultry - a major source of human infection. In this study the antimicrobial susceptibility of isolates from a UK-wide survey of  [CLS] Campylobacter in retail poultry [CLS]  in 2001 and 2004-5 was investigated. The occurrence of phenotypes resistant to tetracycline, quinolones (ciprofloxacin and naladixic acid), erythromycin, chloramphenicol and aminoglycosides was quantified. This was compared with a", " was also evidence of clustering of resistance phenotypes within lineages; indicative of local expansion of resistant strains.\nThese results are consistent with the widespread acquisition of antimicrobial resistance among  [CLS] chicken associated Campylobacter [CLS]  isolates, either through mutation or horizontal gene transfer, and the expansion of these lineages as a proportion of the population. As Campylobacter are not known to multiply outside of", " acquisition of antimicrobial resistance among chicken associated Campylobacter isolates, either through mutation or horizontal gene transfer, and the expansion of these lineages as a proportion of the population. As  [CLS] Campylobacter are not known to multiply outside of the host and long-term carriage in humans is extremely infrequent in industrialized countries, the most likely location for the proliferation of resistant lineages is in farmed chickens [CLS] .\n\n", " acquisition of antimicrobial resistance among chicken associated Campylobacter isolates, either through mutation or horizontal gene transfer, and the expansion of these lineages as a proportion of the population. As  [CLS] Campylobacter are not known to multiply outside of the host and long-term carriage in humans [CLS]  is extremely infrequent in industrialized countries, the most likely location for the proliferation of resistant lineages is in farmed chickens.\n\n"]]
["bb_train_112", [" [CLS] antimicrobial resistance among Campylobacter [CLS]  isolates from UK retail poultry and evidence for clonal expansion of resistant lineages.\nAntimicrobial resistance is increasing among clinical Campylobacter cases and is common among isolates from other sources,", " [CLS] Antimicrobial resistance is increasing among clinical Campylobacter [CLS]  cases and is common among isolates from other sources, specifically retail poultry - a major source of human infection. In this study the antimicrobial susceptibility of isolates from a", " widespread acquisition. There was also evidence of clustering of resistance phenotypes within lineages; indicative of local expansion of resistant strains.\nThese results are consistent with the widespread acquisition of  [CLS] antimicrobial resistance among chicken associated Campylobacter [CLS]  isolates, either through mutation or horizontal gene transfer, and the expansion of these lineages as a proportion of the population. As Campylobacter are not known to multiply outside of", " acquisition of antimicrobial resistance among chicken associated Campylobacter isolates, either through mutation or horizontal gene transfer, and the expansion of these lineages as a proportion of the population. As  [CLS] Campylobacter are not known to multiply outside of the host and long-term carriage in humans is extremely infrequent in industrialized countries, the most likely location for the proliferation of resistant [CLS]  lineages is in farmed chickens.\n\n"]]
["bb_train_113", [" upon Multi Locus Sequence Typing (MLST) to investigate the pattern of antimicrobial resistance acquisition.\nAntimicrobial resistance was present in all lineage clusters, but statistical testing showed a non-random distribution.  [CLS] Erythromycin resistance was associated with Campylobacter coli [CLS] . For all antimicrobials tested, resistant isolates were distributed among relatively distant lineages indicative of widespread acquisition. There was also evidence of clustering of resistance phenotypes within lineages; indicative of"]]
["bb_train_114", [" bacterium that causes life-threatening infections in susceptible individuals and is resistant to most clinically available antimicrobials. Genomic and proteomic studies have identified three genes, pa0102, pa2053 and pa4676, in  [CLS] P. aeruginosa PAO1 encoding three functional \u03b2-carbonic anhydrases (\u03b2-CAs): psCA1, psCA2 and psCA3, respectively. These \u03b2-CAs could serve as novel antimicrobial drug targets for this pathogen [CLS] . X-ray crystallographic structural studies have been initiated to characterize the structure and function of these proteins. This communication describes the production of two crystal forms (A and B) of"]]
["bb_train_115", [" [CLS] Salmonella Paratyphi A infection among israeli travelers [CLS]  to Nepal.\nIn Asia, Salmonella Paratyphi A is an emerging infection, and travelers are increasingly at risk. During October 2009-November 2009, an outbreak in S. Paratyphi A infection was"]]
["bb_train_116", [" [CLS] Salmonella Paratyphi A infection among israeli travelers to Nepal [CLS] .\nIn Asia, Salmonella Paratyphi A is an emerging infection, and travelers are increasingly at risk. During October 2009-November 2009, an outbreak in S. Paratyphi A infection was noted in", " [CLS] Asia, Salmonella Paratyphi A [CLS]  is an emerging infection, and travelers are increasingly at risk. During October 2009-November 2009, an outbreak in S. Paratyphi A infection was noted in Israeli travelers returning from Nepal."]]
["bb_train_117", [" A infection among israeli travelers to Nepal.\nIn Asia, Salmonella Paratyphi A is an emerging infection, and travelers are increasingly at risk. During October 2009-November 2009, an outbreak in  [CLS] S. Paratyphi A infection was noted in Israeli travelers [CLS]  returning from Nepal.\nAn outbreak investigation included a standardized exposure questionnaire admitted to all patients and medical chart abstraction. Isolates were tested for antimicrobial susceptibility and pulsed-field gel electrophoresis", " standardized exposure questionnaire admitted to all patients and medical chart abstraction. Isolates were tested for antimicrobial susceptibility and pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE).\nDuring 1 October 2009-30 November 2009, 37  [CLS] Israeli travelers returning from Nepal were diagnosed with S. Paratyphi A [CLS]  bacteremia. All 37 case isolates had an identical pattern on PFGE, and all were nalidixic acid resistant. Only 1 food venue was frequented by all the outbreak cases, with"]]
["bb_train_118", [" A infection among israeli travelers to Nepal.\nIn Asia, Salmonella Paratyphi A is an emerging infection, and travelers are increasingly at risk. During October 2009-November 2009, an outbreak in  [CLS] S. Paratyphi A infection was noted in Israeli travelers returning from Nepal [CLS] .\nAn outbreak investigation included a standardized exposure questionnaire admitted to all patients and medical chart abstraction. Isolates were tested for antimicrobial susceptibility and pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE).\nDuring 1", " to all patients and medical chart abstraction. Isolates were tested for antimicrobial susceptibility and pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE).\nDuring 1 October 2009-30 November 2009, 37 Israeli travelers returning from  [CLS] Nepal were diagnosed with S. Paratyphi A [CLS]  bacteremia. All 37 case isolates had an identical pattern on PFGE, and all were nalidixic acid resistant. Only 1 food venue was frequented by all the outbreak cases, with"]]
["bb_train_119", [" medical chart abstraction. Isolates were tested for antimicrobial susceptibility and pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE).\nDuring 1 October 2009-30 November 2009, 37 Israeli travelers returning from Nepal were diagnosed with  [CLS] S. Paratyphi A bacteremia. All 37 case isolates had an identical pattern on PFGE, and all were nalidixic acid resistant [CLS] . Only 1 food venue was frequented by all the outbreak cases, with the largest number of exposures occurring around the Jewish New Year. All patients recovered without complications. Time"]]
["bb_train_120", [" [CLS] lytic bacteriophage, \u03a6 st1 [CLS] , for biocontrol of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium in chickens.\nIn this study, a Salmonella Typhimurium lytic bacteriophage, \u03a6 st1, which was isolated from chicken faecal material, was evaluated as", " [CLS] lytic bacteriophage, \u03a6 st1 [CLS] , which was isolated from chicken faecal material, was evaluated as a candidate for biocontrol of Salmonella in chickens. The morphology of \u03a6 st1 showed strong resemblance to members of", " from chicken faecal material, was evaluated as a candidate for biocontrol of Salmonella in chickens. The morphology of \u03a6 st1 showed strong resemblance to members of the Siphoviridae family.  [CLS] \u03a6 st1 was observed to be a DNA phage with an estimated genome size of 121 kbp. It was found to be able to infect S. Typhimurium and S. Hadar, with a stronger lytic activity [CLS]  against the former. Subsequent characterisation of \u03a6 st1 against S. Typhimurium showed that \u03a6 st1 has a latent period of 40 min with an average burst size of 22"]]
["bb_train_121", [" [CLS] Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium in chickens [CLS] .\nIn this study, a Salmonella Typhimurium lytic bacteriophage, \u03a6 st1, which was isolated from chicken faecal material, was evaluated as a candidate for biocontrol of Salmonella in chickens. The"]]
["bb_train_122", [" [CLS] Salmonella Typhimurium lytic bacteriophage, \u03a6 st1, which was isolated from chicken faecal material [CLS] , was evaluated as a candidate for biocontrol of Salmonella in chickens. The morphology of \u03a6 st1 showed strong resemblance to members of the Siphoviridae family. \u03a6 st1 was observed"]]
["bb_train_123", [" [CLS] Salmonella Typhimurium lytic bacteriophage [CLS] , \u03a6 st1, which was isolated from chicken faecal material, was evaluated as a candidate for biocontrol of Salmonella in chickens. The morphology of \u03a6 st1 showed strong resemblance to"]]
["bb_train_124", [" [CLS] \u03a6 st1, which was isolated from chicken faecal material [CLS] , was evaluated as a candidate for biocontrol of Salmonella in chickens. The morphology of \u03a6 st1 showed strong resemblance to members of the Siphoviridae family. \u03a6 st1 was observed", " increment in phage titre (3.8 log\u2081\u2080 PFU/ml) was observed. \u03a6 st1 produced adsorption rates of 88.4-92.2% at pH7-9 and demonstrated the highest bacteria reduction (6.6 log\u2081\u2080 CFU/ml) at pH9.  [CLS] \u03a6 st1 also showed an insignificant different (P>0.05) reduction rate of host cells [CLS]  at 37 \u00b0C (6.4 log\u2081\u2080 CFU/ml) and 42 \u00b0C (6.0 log\u2081\u2080 CFU/ml). The in vivo study using \u03a6 st1 showed that intracloacal inoculation of ~10\u00b9\u00b2 PFU/ml of the phage", " st1 also showed an insignificant different (P>0.05) reduction rate of host cells at 37 \u00b0C (6.4 log\u2081\u2080 CFU/ml) and 42 \u00b0C (6.0 log\u2081\u2080 CFU/ml). The in vivo study using  [CLS] \u03a6 st1 showed that intracloacal [CLS]  inoculation of ~10\u00b9\u00b2 PFU/ml of the phage in the chickens challenged with ~10\u00b9\u2070 CFU/ml of S. Typhimurium was able to reduce (P<0.05) the S. Typhimurium more rapidly than the", " st1 also showed an insignificant different (P>0.05) reduction rate of host cells at 37 \u00b0C (6.4 log\u2081\u2080 CFU/ml) and 42 \u00b0C (6.0 log\u2081\u2080 CFU/ml). The in vivo study using  [CLS] \u03a6 st1 showed that intracloacal inoculation of ~10\u00b9\u00b2 PFU/ml of the phage in the chickens [CLS]  challenged with ~10\u00b9\u2070 CFU/ml of S. Typhimurium was able to reduce (P<0.05) the S. Typhimurium more rapidly than the untreated group. The Salmonella count reduced to 2.9 log\u2081\u2080 CFU/ml", " and S. Typhimurium was not detected at and after 24h of post-challenge. Reduction of Salmonella count in visceral organs was also observed at 6h post-challenge. Approximately 1.6 log\u2081\u2080 FU/ml  [CLS] \u03a6 st1 was found to persist in the caecal wall of the chicks [CLS]  at 72 h of post-challenge. The present study indicated that \u03a6 st1 may serve as a potential biocontrol agent to reduce the Salmonella count in caecal content of chickens.", " and S. Typhimurium was not detected at and after 24h of post-challenge. Reduction of Salmonella count in visceral organs was also observed at 6h post-challenge. Approximately 1.6 log\u2081\u2080 FU/ml  [CLS] \u03a6 st1 was found to persist in the caecal wall of the chicks [CLS]  at 72 h of post-challenge. The present study indicated that \u03a6 st1 may serve as a potential biocontrol agent to reduce the Salmonella count in caecal content of chickens.", " 6h post-challenge. Approximately 1.6 log\u2081\u2080 FU/ml \u03a6 st1 was found to persist in the caecal wall of the chicks at 72 h of post-challenge. The present study indicated that  [CLS] \u03a6 st1 may serve as a potential biocontrol agent to reduce the Salmonella count in caecal content of chickens [CLS] .\n\n", " 6h post-challenge. Approximately 1.6 log\u2081\u2080 FU/ml \u03a6 st1 was found to persist in the caecal wall of the chicks at 72 h of post-challenge. The present study indicated that  [CLS] \u03a6 st1 may serve as a potential biocontrol agent to reduce the Salmonella count in caecal content of chickens [CLS] .\n\n"]]
["bb_train_125", [" from chicken faecal material, was evaluated as a candidate for biocontrol of Salmonella in chickens. The morphology of \u03a6 st1 showed strong resemblance to members of the Siphoviridae family.  [CLS] \u03a6 st1 was observed to be a DNA phage with an estimated genome size of 121 kbp. It was found to be able to infect S. Typhimurium and S. Hadar [CLS] , with a stronger lytic activity against the former. Subsequent characterisation of \u03a6 st1 against S. Typhimurium showed that \u03a6 st1 has a latent period of 40 min with an", " from chicken faecal material, was evaluated as a candidate for biocontrol of Salmonella in chickens. The morphology of \u03a6 st1 showed strong resemblance to members of the Siphoviridae family.  [CLS] \u03a6 st1 was observed to be a DNA phage with an estimated genome size of 121 kbp. It was found to be able to infect S. Typhimurium [CLS]  and S. Hadar, with a stronger lytic activity against the former. Subsequent characterisation of \u03a6 st1 against S. Typhimurium showed that \u03a6 st1 has a latent period of 40"]]
["bb_train_126", [" insignificant different (P>0.05) reduction rate of host cells at 37 \u00b0C (6.4 log\u2081\u2080 CFU/ml) and 42 \u00b0C (6.0 log\u2081\u2080 CFU/ml). The in vivo study using \u03a6 st1 showed that  [CLS] intracloacal inoculation of ~10\u00b9\u00b2 PFU/ml of the phage in the chickens challenged with ~10\u00b9\u2070 CFU/ml of S. Typhimurium [CLS]  was able to reduce (P<0.05) the S. Typhimurium more rapidly than the untreated group. The Salmonella count reduced to 2.9 log\u2081\u2080 CFU/ml within 6h of post-challenge and S. Typhimurium", " \u00b0C (6.4 log\u2081\u2080 CFU/ml) and 42 \u00b0C (6.0 log\u2081\u2080 CFU/ml). The in vivo study using \u03a6 st1 showed that intracloacal inoculation of ~10\u00b9\u00b2 PFU/ml of the phage in the  [CLS] chickens challenged with ~10\u00b9\u2070 CFU/ml of S. Typhimurium [CLS]  was able to reduce (P<0.05) the S. Typhimurium more rapidly than the untreated group. The Salmonella count reduced to 2.9 log\u2081\u2080 CFU/ml within 6h of post-challenge and S. Typhimurium"]]
["bb_train_127", [" [CLS] VRE [CLS] ): a systematic review.\nNo published systematic reviews have assessed the natural history of colonization with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) or vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE). Time to clearance of colonization has", " Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE): a systematic review.\nNo published systematic reviews have assessed the natural history of colonization with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) or vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus ( [CLS] VRE [CLS] ). Time to clearance of colonization has important implications for patient care and infection control policy.\nWe performed parallel searches in OVID Medline for studies that reported the time to", " has important implications for patient care and infection control policy.\nWe performed parallel searches in OVID Medline for studies that reported the time to documented clearance of MRSA and  [CLS] VRE [CLS]  colonization in the absence of treatment, published between January 1990 and July 2012.\nFor MRSA, we screened 982 articles, identified 16 eligible studies (13 observational studies and 3 randomized", " and July 2012.\nFor MRSA, we screened 982 articles, identified 16 eligible studies (13 observational studies and 3 randomized controlled trials), for a total of 1,804 non-duplicated subjects. For  [CLS] VRE [CLS] , we screened 284 articles, identified 13 eligible studies (12 observational studies and 1 randomized controlled trial), for a total of 1,936 non-duplicated subjects. Studies reported varying definitions of clearance", " Studies varied in the frequency of sampling, assays used for sampling, and follow-up period. The median duration of total follow-up was 38 weeks for MRSA and 25 weeks for  [CLS] VRE [CLS] . Based on pooled analyses, the model-estimated median time to clearance was 88 weeks after documented colonization for MRSA-colonized patients and 26 weeks for VRE-colonized patients. In a secondary analysis,", " MRSA and 25 weeks for VRE. Based on pooled analyses, the model-estimated median time to clearance was 88 weeks after documented colonization for MRSA-colonized patients and 26 weeks for  [CLS] VRE [CLS] -colonized patients. In a secondary analysis, clearance rates for MRSA and VRE were compared by restricting the duration of follow-up for the MRSA studies to the maximum observed time point", " model-estimated median time to clearance was 88 weeks after documented colonization for MRSA-colonized patients and 26 weeks for VRE-colonized patients. In a secondary analysis, clearance rates for MRSA and  [CLS] VRE [CLS]  were compared by restricting the duration of follow-up for the MRSA studies to the maximum observed time point for VRE studies (43 weeks). With this restriction, the model-fitted median", " occur at 41 weeks after documented colonization, demonstrating the sensitivity of the pooled estimate to length of study follow-up.\nFew available studies report the natural history of MRSA and  [CLS] VRE [CLS]  colonization. Lack of a consistent definition of clearance, uncertainty regarding the time of initial colonization, variation in frequency of sampling for persistent colonization, assays employed and variation in duration"]]
["bb_train_128", [" MRSA and 25 weeks for VRE. Based on pooled analyses, the model-estimated median time to clearance was 88 weeks after documented colonization for MRSA-colonized patients and 26 weeks for  [CLS] VRE-colonized patients [CLS] . In a secondary analysis, clearance rates for MRSA and VRE were compared by restricting the duration of follow-up for the MRSA studies to the maximum observed time point for"]]
["bb_train_129", [" gave highly robust cytotoxicity data in 384-well screening plates. As proof of principle, successful combination with a luminescence-based assay in HTS format was demonstrated. Here, both intracellular growth of  [CLS] Legionella pneumophila (luminescence) and host cell [CLS]  viability (SYTOX Green exclusion) were assayed in the same screening well. Incorporation of membrane-impermeant, DNA-binding, fluorescent dyes in HTS assays should prove useful by allowing evaluation of cytotoxicity in"]]
["bb_train_130", [" [CLS] Methylocella: a gourmand among methanotrophs [CLS] .\nA recent article in Nature describes the ability of Methylocella silvestris to grow simultaneously on methane and longer chain alkanes, something never before observed in the microbial world. It"]]
["bb_train_131", [" [CLS] ability of Methylocella silvestris to grow simultaneously on methane and longer chain alkanes [CLS] , something never before observed in the microbial world. It adds to a growing list of unique metabolic traits that distinguish Methylocella from any other bacterium. \n\n"]]
["bb_train_132", [" [CLS] Mycoplasma in free-ranging gopher tortoises (Gopherus polyphemus [CLS] ) in Georgia, USA.\nAbstract Upper respiratory tract disease (URTD) in the gopher tortoise (Gopherus polyphemus) is highly contagious and has been implicated in the reduction of populations throughout the", " [CLS] Mycoplasma in free-ranging gopher tortoises [CLS]  (Gopherus polyphemus) in Georgia, USA.\nAbstract Upper respiratory tract disease (URTD) in the gopher tortoise (Gopherus polyphemus) is highly contagious and has been implicated in the reduction of populations"]]
["bb_train_133", [" [CLS] Mycoplasma in free-ranging gopher tortoises (Gopherus polyphemus) in Georgia [CLS] , USA.\nAbstract Upper respiratory tract disease (URTD) in the gopher tortoise (Gopherus polyphemus) is highly contagious and has been implicated in the reduction of populations throughout the range. With", " [CLS] Mycoplasma in free-ranging gopher tortoises (Gopherus polyphemus) in Georgia, USA [CLS] .\nAbstract Upper respiratory tract disease (URTD) in the gopher tortoise (Gopherus polyphemus) is highly contagious and has been implicated in the reduction of populations throughout the range. With the"]]
["bb_train_134", [" populations throughout the range. With the exception of a few limited studies, the prevalence of URTD in Georgia, USA tortoise populations is poorly known. We found that exposure to  [CLS] Mycoplasma agassizii and Mycoplasma testudineum, associated with URTD, varied geographically among 11 Georgia tortoise populations [CLS] . The prevalence of antibodies to M. agassizii in individual populations was either very low (0-3%, n=7 populations) or very high (96-100%, n=4 populations), whereas there was variation in the"]]
["bb_train_135", [" populations throughout the range. With the exception of a few limited studies, the prevalence of URTD in Georgia, USA tortoise populations is poorly known. We found that exposure to  [CLS] Mycoplasma agassizii and Mycoplasma testudineum, associated with URTD, varied geographically among 11 Georgia [CLS]  tortoise populations. The prevalence of antibodies to M. agassizii in individual populations was either very low (0-3%, n=7 populations) or very high (96-100%, n=4 populations), whereas there was variation"]]
["bb_train_136", [" range. With the exception of a few limited studies, the prevalence of URTD in Georgia, USA tortoise populations is poorly known. We found that exposure to Mycoplasma agassizii and  [CLS] Mycoplasma testudineum, associated with URTD, varied geographically among 11 Georgia tortoise populations [CLS] . The prevalence of antibodies to M. agassizii in individual populations was either very low (0-3%, n=7 populations) or very high (96-100%, n=4 populations), whereas there was variation in the"]]
["bb_train_137", [" range. With the exception of a few limited studies, the prevalence of URTD in Georgia, USA tortoise populations is poorly known. We found that exposure to Mycoplasma agassizii and  [CLS] Mycoplasma testudineum, associated with URTD, varied geographically among 11 Georgia [CLS]  tortoise populations. The prevalence of antibodies to M. agassizii in individual populations was either very low (0-3%, n=7 populations) or very high (96-100%, n=4 populations), whereas there was variation"]]
["bb_train_138", [" populations is poorly known. We found that exposure to Mycoplasma agassizii and Mycoplasma testudineum, associated with URTD, varied geographically among 11 Georgia tortoise populations. The prevalence of antibodies to  [CLS] M. agassizii in individual populations was either very low (0-3%, n=7 populations) or very high (96-100%, n=4 populations), whereas there was variation in the prevalence of antibodies to M. testudineum among populations (20-61%, n=10) with only one site being negative. Five sites had tortoises with antibodies to both pathogens [CLS] , and these were the only sites where we observed tortoises with clinical signs consistent with URTD. We did not find tortoises with clinical signs of URTD at sites with", " sites with tortoises with antibodies only to M. testudineum, which provides evidence that this organism may be of limited pathogenicity for gopher tortoises. Collectively, these data indicate that both  [CLS] M. agassizii and M. testudineum are present in Georgia populations of gopher tortoises and that clinical disease is apparent in populations where both pathogens are present. Additional research is needed to better understand the role of these two pathogens [CLS] , and other potential pathogens, in the overall health of tortoise populations, especially if future conservation efforts involve translocation of tortoises.\n\n", " sites with tortoises with antibodies only to M. testudineum, which provides evidence that this organism may be of limited pathogenicity for gopher tortoises. Collectively, these data indicate that both  [CLS] M. agassizii and M. testudineum are present in Georgia populations of gopher tortoises and that clinical disease is apparent in populations where both pathogens [CLS]  are present. Additional research is needed to better understand the role of these two pathogens, and other potential pathogens, in the overall health of tortoise populations, especially if future"]]
["bb_train_139", [" to M. agassizii in individual populations was either very low (0-3%, n=7 populations) or very high (96-100%, n=4 populations), whereas there was variation in the prevalence of antibodies to  [CLS] M. testudineum among populations (20-61%, n=10) with only one site being negative. Five sites had tortoises with antibodies to both pathogens [CLS] , and these were the only sites where we observed tortoises with clinical signs consistent with URTD. We did not find tortoises with clinical signs of URTD at sites with", " sites where we observed tortoises with clinical signs consistent with URTD. We did not find tortoises with clinical signs of URTD at sites with tortoises with antibodies only to  [CLS] M. testudineum, which provides evidence that this organism may be of limited pathogenicity [CLS]  for gopher tortoises. Collectively, these data indicate that both M. agassizii and M. testudineum are present in Georgia populations of gopher tortoises and that clinical disease is apparent in", " with antibodies only to M. testudineum, which provides evidence that this organism may be of limited pathogenicity for gopher tortoises. Collectively, these data indicate that both M. agassizii and  [CLS] M. testudineum are present in Georgia populations of gopher tortoises and that clinical disease is apparent in populations where both pathogens [CLS]  are present. Additional research is needed to better understand the role of these two pathogens, and other potential pathogens, in the overall health of tortoise populations, especially if future", " with antibodies only to M. testudineum, which provides evidence that this organism may be of limited pathogenicity for gopher tortoises. Collectively, these data indicate that both M. agassizii and  [CLS] M. testudineum are present in Georgia populations of gopher tortoises and that clinical disease is apparent in populations where both pathogens are present. Additional research is needed to better understand the role of these two pathogens [CLS] , and other potential pathogens, in the overall health of tortoise populations, especially if future conservation efforts involve translocation of tortoises.\n\n"]]
["bb_train_140", [" sites with tortoises with antibodies only to M. testudineum, which provides evidence that this organism may be of limited pathogenicity for gopher tortoises. Collectively, these data indicate that both  [CLS] M. agassizii and M. testudineum are present in Georgia populations of gopher tortoises [CLS]  and that clinical disease is apparent in populations where both pathogens are present. Additional research is needed to better understand the role of these two pathogens, and other potential"]]
["bb_train_141", [" sites with tortoises with antibodies only to M. testudineum, which provides evidence that this organism may be of limited pathogenicity for gopher tortoises. Collectively, these data indicate that both  [CLS] M. agassizii and M. testudineum are present in Georgia [CLS]  populations of gopher tortoises and that clinical disease is apparent in populations where both pathogens are present. Additional research is needed to better understand the role of these two"]]
["bb_train_142", [" with antibodies only to M. testudineum, which provides evidence that this organism may be of limited pathogenicity for gopher tortoises. Collectively, these data indicate that both M. agassizii and  [CLS] M. testudineum are present in Georgia [CLS]  populations of gopher tortoises and that clinical disease is apparent in populations where both pathogens are present. Additional research is needed to better understand the role of these two"]]
["bb_train_143", [" with antibodies only to M. testudineum, which provides evidence that this organism may be of limited pathogenicity for gopher tortoises. Collectively, these data indicate that both M. agassizii and  [CLS] M. testudineum are present in Georgia populations of gopher tortoises [CLS]  and that clinical disease is apparent in populations where both pathogens are present. Additional research is needed to better understand the role of these two pathogens, and other potential"]]
["bb_train_144", [" tuberculosis (Mtb) infection, the engulfment ligand annexin1 is an important mediator in DC cross-presentation that increases efferocytosis in DCs and intrinsically enhances the capacity of the DC antigen-presenting machinery.  [CLS] Annexin1-deficient mice were highly susceptible to Mtb [CLS]  infection and showed an impaired Mtb antigen-specific CD8+ T cell response. Importantly, annexin1 expression was greatly downregulated in Mtb-infected human blood monocyte-derived DCs, indicating that reduction of annexin1 is", " the DC antigen-presenting machinery. Annexin1-deficient mice were highly susceptible to Mtb infection and showed an impaired Mtb antigen-specific CD8+ T cell response. Importantly, annexin1 expression was greatly downregulated in  [CLS] Mtb-infected human blood [CLS]  monocyte-derived DCs, indicating that reduction of annexin1 is a critical mechanism for immune evasion by Mtb. Collectively, these data indicate that annexin1 is essential in immunity to Mtb infection", " the DC antigen-presenting machinery. Annexin1-deficient mice were highly susceptible to Mtb infection and showed an impaired Mtb antigen-specific CD8+ T cell response. Importantly, annexin1 expression was greatly downregulated in  [CLS] Mtb-infected human [CLS]  blood monocyte-derived DCs, indicating that reduction of annexin1 is a critical mechanism for immune evasion by Mtb. Collectively, these data indicate that annexin1 is essential in immunity to Mtb"]]
["bb_train_145", [" [CLS] hydrogen cyanide (HCN) production from Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P. aeruginosa [CLS] ) strains in vitro, using laser-based photoacoustic spectroscopy. Simultaneously, the production of ammonia (NH3) was measured, and the influence of different factors (e.g. the medium, temperature and antibiotics treatment) was", " and antibiotics treatment) was assessed. Both reference strains and clinical isolates of patients with CF were studied, and compared to other pathogens commonly present in lungs/airways of CF patients.  [CLS] Hydrogen cyanide production starts to rise as soon as P. aeruginosa [CLS]  bacteria reach the stationary phase ((9.0-9.5) \u00d7 10(9) colony forming units, CFUs), up to concentrations of 14.5 microliters per hour (\u00b5l\u2009h(-1)). Different strains of P. aeruginosa produced HCN to", " as soon as P. aeruginosa bacteria reach the stationary phase ((9.0-9.5) \u00d7 10(9) colony forming units, CFUs), up to concentrations of 14.5 microliters per hour (\u00b5l\u2009h(-1)). Different strains of  [CLS] P. aeruginosa produced HCN [CLS]  to varying degrees, and addition of tobramycin strongly reduced HCN production within 2\u2009h from application. Burkholderia cepacia also produced HCN (up to 0.35\u00b5l\u2009h(-1) in 9.0\u2009 \u00d7 \u200910(9)\u2009CFU) while other", " as soon as P. aeruginosa bacteria reach the stationary phase ((9.0-9.5) \u00d7 10(9) colony forming units, CFUs), up to concentrations of 14.5 microliters per hour (\u00b5l\u2009h(-1)). Different strains of  [CLS] P. aeruginosa produced HCN to varying degrees, and addition of tobramycin strongly reduced HCN production [CLS]  within 2\u2009h from application. Burkholderia cepacia also produced HCN (up to 0.35\u00b5l\u2009h(-1) in 9.0\u2009 \u00d7 \u200910(9)\u2009CFU) while other pathogens (Aspergillus fumigatus, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, Mycobacterium abscessus) did not produce detectable"]]
["bb_train_146", [" concentrations of 14.5 microliters per hour (\u00b5l\u2009h(-1)). Different strains of P. aeruginosa produced HCN to varying degrees, and addition of tobramycin strongly reduced HCN production within 2\u2009h from application.  [CLS] Burkholderia cepacia also produced HCN [CLS]  (up to 0.35\u00b5l\u2009h(-1) in 9.0\u2009 \u00d7 \u200910(9)\u2009CFU) while other pathogens (Aspergillus fumigatus, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, Mycobacterium abscessus) did not produce detectable levels. Our study reveals for the first time a", " concentrations of 14.5 microliters per hour (\u00b5l\u2009h(-1)). Different strains of P. aeruginosa produced HCN to varying degrees, and addition of tobramycin strongly reduced HCN production within 2\u2009h from application.  [CLS] Burkholderia cepacia also produced HCN (up to 0.35\u00b5l\u2009h(-1) in 9.0\u2009 \u00d7 \u200910(9)\u2009CFU) while other pathogens [CLS]  (Aspergillus fumigatus, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, Mycobacterium abscessus) did not produce detectable levels. Our study reveals for the first time a broad overview of the dynamics of the HCN production in"]]
["bb_train_147", [" to varying degrees, and addition of tobramycin strongly reduced HCN production within 2\u2009h from application. Burkholderia cepacia also produced HCN (up to 0.35\u00b5l\u2009h(-1) in 9.0\u2009 \u00d7 \u200910(9)\u2009CFU) while other  [CLS] pathogens (Aspergillus fumigatus [CLS] , Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, Mycobacterium abscessus) did not produce detectable levels. Our study reveals for the first time a broad overview of the dynamics of the HCN production in vitro.\n"]]
["bb_train_148", [" to varying degrees, and addition of tobramycin strongly reduced HCN production within 2\u2009h from application. Burkholderia cepacia also produced HCN (up to 0.35\u00b5l\u2009h(-1) in 9.0\u2009 \u00d7 \u200910(9)\u2009CFU) while other  [CLS] pathogens (Aspergillus fumigatus, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia [CLS] , Mycobacterium abscessus) did not produce detectable levels. Our study reveals for the first time a broad overview of the dynamics of the HCN production in vitro.\n\n"]]
["bb_train_149", [" to varying degrees, and addition of tobramycin strongly reduced HCN production within 2\u2009h from application. Burkholderia cepacia also produced HCN (up to 0.35\u00b5l\u2009h(-1) in 9.0\u2009 \u00d7 \u200910(9)\u2009CFU) while other  [CLS] pathogens (Aspergillus fumigatus, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, Mycobacterium abscessus [CLS] ) did not produce detectable levels. Our study reveals for the first time a broad overview of the dynamics of the HCN production in vitro.\n\n"]]
["bb_train_150", [" [CLS] Vibrio salmonicida in fish farm [CLS]  sediments.\nThe persistence of the fish pathogen Vibrio salmonicida in fish farm sediments was studied by use of fluorescent-antibody techniques. The specificities of the monoclonal antibodies and polyclonal rabbit", " [CLS] fish pathogen Vibrio salmonicida [CLS]  in fish farm sediments.\nThe persistence of the fish pathogen Vibrio salmonicida in fish farm sediments was studied by use of fluorescent-antibody techniques. The specificities of the monoclonal antibodies", " [CLS] Vibrio salmonicida in fish farm sediments [CLS] .\nThe persistence of the fish pathogen Vibrio salmonicida in fish farm sediments was studied by use of fluorescent-antibody techniques. The specificities of the monoclonal antibodies and polyclonal rabbit serum", " [CLS] Vibrio salmonicida in fish farm sediments [CLS]  was studied by use of fluorescent-antibody techniques. The specificities of the monoclonal antibodies and polyclonal rabbit serum used in the study were tested against a number of Vibrio strains,", " [CLS] Vibrio salmonicida in fish farm [CLS]  sediments was studied by use of fluorescent-antibody techniques. The specificities of the monoclonal antibodies and polyclonal rabbit serum used in the study were tested against a number of Vibrio", " [CLS] fish pathogen Vibrio salmonicida [CLS]  in fish farm sediments was studied by use of fluorescent-antibody techniques. The specificities of the monoclonal antibodies and polyclonal rabbit serum used in the study were tested against a"]]
["bb_train_151", [" [CLS] fish pathogen Vibrio salmonicida [CLS]  in fish farm sediments.\nThe persistence of the fish pathogen Vibrio salmonicida in fish farm sediments was studied by use of fluorescent-antibody techniques. The specificities of the monoclonal antibodies", " [CLS] fish pathogen Vibrio salmonicida [CLS]  in fish farm sediments was studied by use of fluorescent-antibody techniques. The specificities of the monoclonal antibodies and polyclonal rabbit serum used in the study were tested against a"]]
["bb_train_152", [" farm sediments was studied by use of fluorescent-antibody techniques. The specificities of the monoclonal antibodies and polyclonal rabbit serum used in the study were tested against a number of  [CLS] Vibrio strains, including 4 isolates from intestinal tracts of healthy fish [CLS]  and 98 isolates from sediments. V. salmonicida was detected in sediment samples from diseased farms several months after an outbreak of the disease. The bacterium was also detected in", " farm sediments was studied by use of fluorescent-antibody techniques. The specificities of the monoclonal antibodies and polyclonal rabbit serum used in the study were tested against a number of  [CLS] Vibrio strains, including 4 isolates from intestinal tracts of healthy fish and 98 isolates from sediments [CLS] . V. salmonicida was detected in sediment samples from diseased farms several months after an outbreak of the disease. The bacterium was also detected in a sediment sample from a", " farm sediments was studied by use of fluorescent-antibody techniques. The specificities of the monoclonal antibodies and polyclonal rabbit serum used in the study were tested against a number of  [CLS] Vibrio strains, including 4 isolates from intestinal tracts of healthy fish [CLS]  and 98 isolates from sediments. V. salmonicida was detected in sediment samples from diseased farms several months after an outbreak of the disease. The bacterium was also detected in", " [CLS] Vibrio, Marinilactibacillus and Psychrobacter are Gram-negative bacteria which had been previously detected in such cheeses[1, 2, 9, 12, 13, 28, 49\u201353], and also in a recent large amplicon sequencing study of the microbial composition of 137 different cheese rinds [CLS]  [33].\n", " [CLS] Vibrio, Marinilactibacillus and Psychrobacter are Gram-negative bacteria which had been previously detected in such cheeses [CLS] [1, 2, 9, 12, 13, 28, 49\u201353], and also in a recent large amplicon sequencing study of the microbial composition of 137 different cheese rinds [33].\n"]]
["bb_train_153", [" polyclonal rabbit serum used in the study were tested against a number of Vibrio strains, including 4 isolates from intestinal tracts of healthy fish and 98 isolates from sediments.  [CLS] V. salmonicida was detected in sediment samples from diseased farms several months after an outbreak of the disease. The bacterium was also detected in a sediment sample from a disease-free fish farm [CLS] . No V. salmonicida could be detected in sediments not influenced by fish farming. The number of positive samples was generally higher with application of rabbit serum as opposed to", " polyclonal rabbit serum used in the study were tested against a number of Vibrio strains, including 4 isolates from intestinal tracts of healthy fish and 98 isolates from sediments.  [CLS] V. salmonicida was detected in sediment samples from diseased farms several months after an outbreak of the disease. The bacterium was also detected in a sediment sample from a disease-free fish farm [CLS] . No V. salmonicida could be detected in sediments not influenced by fish farming. The number of positive samples was generally higher with application of rabbit serum as opposed to", " polyclonal rabbit serum used in the study were tested against a number of Vibrio strains, including 4 isolates from intestinal tracts of healthy fish and 98 isolates from sediments.  [CLS] V. salmonicida was detected in sediment samples from diseased farms [CLS]  several months after an outbreak of the disease. The bacterium was also detected in a sediment sample from a disease-free fish farm. No V. salmonicida could be detected in", " polyclonal rabbit serum used in the study were tested against a number of Vibrio strains, including 4 isolates from intestinal tracts of healthy fish and 98 isolates from sediments.  [CLS] V. salmonicida was detected in sediment samples from diseased farms [CLS]  several months after an outbreak of the disease. The bacterium was also detected in a sediment sample from a disease-free fish farm. No V. salmonicida could be detected in"]]
["bb_train_154", [" [CLS] Coxiella burnetii: Embden-Meyerhof pathway.\nPurified preparations of Coxiella burnetii were examined for enzymes of the glycolytic pathway. Glucose-phosphate isomerase, fructose-1,6-diphosphatase, aldolase, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, and pyruvate kinase were shown to be present in C. burnetii extracts. Heat-killed C. burnetii purified with normal yolk sacs demonstrated no activity after disruption. Aldolase was shown to be of the class II type by complete inhibition of activity in the presence of 8 x 10(-3)m ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid. The host enzyme activity (normal and infected yolk sacs [CLS] ) was not affected by the same treatment. When cellulose acetate electrophoresis was performed on the extracts, aldolase from both normal and infected yolk sacs exhibited five isozyme bands, whereas"]]
["bb_train_155", [" Coxiella burnetii were examined for enzymes of the glycolytic pathway. Glucose-phosphate isomerase, fructose-1,6-diphosphatase, aldolase, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, and pyruvate kinase were shown to be present in C. burnetii extracts. Heat-killed  [CLS] C. burnetii purified with normal yolk sacs [CLS]  demonstrated no activity after disruption. Aldolase was shown to be of the class II type by complete inhibition of activity in the presence of 8 x 10(-3)m ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid.", " host enzyme activity (normal and infected yolk sacs) was not affected by the same treatment. When cellulose acetate electrophoresis was performed on the extracts, aldolase from both normal and  [CLS] infected yolk sacs exhibited five isozyme bands, whereas aldolase from the C. burnetii [CLS]  extract appeared as a single band.\n\n"]]
["bb_train_156", [" [CLS] Macaca mulatta sensitized with bacille Calmette Guerin cell wall vaccine and-or infected with virulent Mycobacterium tuberculosis [CLS] .\n\n"]]
["bb_train_157", [" [CLS] virulent Mycobacterium tuberculosis [CLS] .\n\n"]]
["bb_train_158", [" experienced LRI 1.25 times more often than did females; the relative risk of males for WARI was 1.35. A nonbacterial pathogen was recovered from 21% of patients with WARI;  [CLS] respiratory syncytial virus [CLS] , parainfluenza virus types 1 and 3, adenoviruses, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae accounted for 81% of the isolates. Patient age influenced the pattern of recovery of these agents. The most common", " respiratory illness. Males experienced LRI 1.25 times more often than did females; the relative risk of males for WARI was 1.35. A nonbacterial pathogen was recovered from 21% of  [CLS] patients with WARI; respiratory syncytial virus [CLS] , parainfluenza virus types 1 and 3, adenoviruses, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae accounted for 81% of the isolates. Patient age influenced the pattern of recovery of these agents. The most common"]]
["bb_train_159", [" respiratory illness. Males experienced LRI 1.25 times more often than did females; the relative risk of males for WARI was 1.35. A nonbacterial pathogen was recovered from 21% of  [CLS] patients with WARI; respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza virus types 1 and 3 [CLS] , adenoviruses, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae accounted for 81% of the isolates. Patient age influenced the pattern of recovery of these agents. The most common cause of WARI in children under"]]
["bb_train_160", [" respiratory illness. Males experienced LRI 1.25 times more often than did females; the relative risk of males for WARI was 1.35. A nonbacterial pathogen was recovered from 21% of  [CLS] patients with WARI; respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza virus types 1 [CLS]  and 3, adenoviruses, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae accounted for 81% of the isolates. Patient age influenced the pattern of recovery of these agents. The most common cause of WARI in"]]
["bb_train_161", [" respiratory illness. Males experienced LRI 1.25 times more often than did females; the relative risk of males for WARI was 1.35. A nonbacterial pathogen was recovered from 21% of  [CLS] patients with WARI; respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza virus types 1 and 3, adenoviruses [CLS] , and Mycoplasma pneumoniae accounted for 81% of the isolates. Patient age influenced the pattern of recovery of these agents. The most common cause of WARI in children under 5"]]
["bb_train_162", [" respiratory illness. Males experienced LRI 1.25 times more often than did females; the relative risk of males for WARI was 1.35. A nonbacterial pathogen was recovered from 21% of  [CLS] patients with WARI; respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza virus types 1 and 3, adenoviruses, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae [CLS]  accounted for 81% of the isolates. Patient age influenced the pattern of recovery of these agents. The most common cause of WARI in children under 5 years of age", " of the isolates. Patient age influenced the pattern of recovery of these agents. The most common cause of WARI in children under 5 years of age was RSV whereas  [CLS] Mycoplasma pneumoniae was the most frequent isolate from school age children with wheezing illness [CLS] . The data expand our understanding of the causes of WARI and are useful to diagnosticians and to researchers interested in the control of lower respiratory disease.\n\n"]]
["bb_train_163", [" and 3, adenoviruses, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae accounted for 81% of the isolates. Patient age influenced the pattern of recovery of these agents. The most common cause of WARI in  [CLS] children under 5 years of age was RSV [CLS]  whereas Mycoplasma pneumoniae was the most frequent isolate from school age children with wheezing illness. The data expand our understanding of the causes of WARI and are useful to"]]
["bb_train_164", [" parainfluenza virus types 1 and 3, adenoviruses, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae accounted for 81% of the isolates. Patient age influenced the pattern of recovery of these agents. The most common  [CLS] cause of WARI in children under 5 years of age was RSV [CLS]  whereas Mycoplasma pneumoniae was the most frequent isolate from school age children with wheezing illness. The data expand our understanding of the causes of WARI and are useful to"]]
["bb_train_165", [" [CLS] Serratia\" in the Hospital S. Camillo De Lellis of Roma (Italy [CLS] ) (author's transl)].\n\n", " [CLS] Serratia\" in the Hospital S. Camillo De Lellis of Roma [CLS]  (Italy) (author's transl)].\n\n"]]
["bb_train_166", [" [CLS] Serratia\" in the Hospital S. Camillo De Lellis [CLS]  of Roma (Italy) (author's transl)].\n\n"]]
["bb_train_167", [" Pelecypod-associated cholera in Sardinia.\nFrom Oct. 30 to Nov. 7, 1979, 10 people in the Sardinian province of Cagliari had onset of bacteriologically confirmed cholera. Two symptom-free excretors of  [CLS] Vibrio cholerae O:1 were detected in household contacts of the patients [CLS] . There were no deaths. All but 1 of the 12 people with V. cholerae O:1 infection gave a history of recent consumption of marine bivalves known locally as arselle"]]
["bb_train_168", [" of bacteriologically confirmed cholera. Two symptom-free excretors of Vibrio cholerae O:1 were detected in household contacts of the patients. There were no deaths. All but 1 of the 12  [CLS] people with V. cholerae O:1 infection [CLS]  gave a history of recent consumption of marine bivalves known locally as arselle (pelecypods). Triplicate matched neighbourhood controls for each of the first 7 cases identified were also interviewed;", " consumption of marine bivalves known locally as arselle (pelecypods). Triplicate matched neighbourhood controls for each of the first 7 cases identified were also interviewed; none had recently eaten arselle.  [CLS] V. cholerae O:1 was also recovered from samples of water [CLS]  and bivalves obtained from a lagoon on the outskirts of the city of Cagliari. Arselle had also been implicated as the vehicle of transmission in 1973 in the last", " consumption of marine bivalves known locally as arselle (pelecypods). Triplicate matched neighbourhood controls for each of the first 7 cases identified were also interviewed; none had recently eaten arselle.  [CLS] V. cholerae O:1 was also recovered from samples of water and bivalves obtained from a lagoon on the outskirts of the city of Cagliari [CLS] . Arselle had also been implicated as the vehicle of transmission in 1973 in the last outbreak of cholera in Sardinia. It seems unlikely that cholera transmission had persisted locally", " consumption of marine bivalves known locally as arselle (pelecypods). Triplicate matched neighbourhood controls for each of the first 7 cases identified were also interviewed; none had recently eaten arselle.  [CLS] V. cholerae O:1 was also recovered from samples of water and bivalves obtained from a lagoon on the outskirts of the city of Cagliari. Arselle [CLS]  had also been implicated as the vehicle of transmission in 1973 in the last outbreak of cholera in Sardinia. It seems unlikely that cholera transmission had persisted locally in", " consumption of marine bivalves known locally as arselle (pelecypods). Triplicate matched neighbourhood controls for each of the first 7 cases identified were also interviewed; none had recently eaten arselle.  [CLS] V. cholerae O:1 was also recovered from samples of water and bivalves [CLS]  obtained from a lagoon on the outskirts of the city of Cagliari. Arselle had also been implicated as the vehicle of transmission in 1973 in the last outbreak of"]]
["bb_train_169", [" [CLS] Chlamydia trachomatis and C. psittaci growing in McCoy cells [CLS] : relationship with clinical syndrome and host origin.\nThe effects of omission of individual amino acids from growth medium on the multiplication of a range of Chlamydia trachomatis and C.", " growing in McCoy cells: relationship with clinical syndrome and host origin.\nThe effects of omission of individual amino acids from growth medium on the multiplication of a range of  [CLS] Chlamydia trachomatis and C. psittaci strains in cycloheximide-treated McCoy cells [CLS]  have been assessed. Differences in requirements were revealed which for C. trachomatis strains correlated with clinical syndrome and for C. psittaci with host origin. All 11 strains of C."]]
["bb_train_170", [" [CLS] C. psittaci growing in McCoy cells [CLS] : relationship with clinical syndrome and host origin.\nThe effects of omission of individual amino acids from growth medium on the multiplication of a range of Chlamydia trachomatis and C.", " cells: relationship with clinical syndrome and host origin.\nThe effects of omission of individual amino acids from growth medium on the multiplication of a range of Chlamydia trachomatis and  [CLS] C. psittaci strains in cycloheximide-treated McCoy cells [CLS]  have been assessed. Differences in requirements were revealed which for C. trachomatis strains correlated with clinical syndrome and for C. psittaci with host origin. All 11 strains of C."]]
["bb_train_171", [" growth medium on the multiplication of a range of Chlamydia trachomatis and C. psittaci strains in cycloheximide-treated McCoy cells have been assessed. Differences in requirements were revealed which for  [CLS] C. trachomatis strains correlated with clinical [CLS]  syndrome and for C. psittaci with host origin. All 11 strains of C. trachomatis examined showed a requirement for addition of histidine to the medium; this was not shown", " of C. trachomatis examined showed a requirement for addition of histidine to the medium; this was not shown by any of four C. psittaci strains. Among the strains of  [CLS] C. trachomatis, three from cases of trachoma [CLS] , representing serotypes A, B and C, showed a distinctive requirement for the addition of tryptophan to the medium, whilst six strains of oculogenital origin, representing serotypes D-I, exhibited no"]]
["bb_train_172", [" showed a requirement for addition of histidine to the medium; this was not shown by any of four C. psittaci strains. Among the strains of C. trachomatis, three from  [CLS] cases of trachoma, representing serotypes A, B [CLS]  and C, showed a distinctive requirement for the addition of tryptophan to the medium, whilst six strains of oculogenital origin, representing serotypes D-I, exhibited no requirement for tryptophan or"]]
["bb_train_173", [" showed a requirement for addition of histidine to the medium; this was not shown by any of four C. psittaci strains. Among the strains of C. trachomatis, three from  [CLS] cases of trachoma, representing serotypes A, B and C [CLS] , showed a distinctive requirement for the addition of tryptophan to the medium, whilst six strains of oculogenital origin, representing serotypes D-I, exhibited no requirement for tryptophan or methionine; a"]]
["bb_train_174", [" showed a requirement for addition of histidine to the medium; this was not shown by any of four C. psittaci strains. Among the strains of C. trachomatis, three from  [CLS] cases of trachoma, representing serotypes A [CLS] , B and C, showed a distinctive requirement for the addition of tryptophan to the medium, whilst six strains of oculogenital origin, representing serotypes D-I, exhibited no requirement for tryptophan"]]
["bb_train_175", [" C. trachomatis, three from cases of trachoma, representing serotypes A, B and C, showed a distinctive requirement for the addition of tryptophan to the medium, whilst six strains of  [CLS] oculogenital origin, representing serotypes D-I [CLS] , exhibited no requirement for tryptophan or methionine; a lymphogranuloma venereum and a 'fast variant' strain both showed a requirement for methionine. Of the four C. psittaci strains from different"]]
["bb_train_176", [" [CLS] Arhodomonas aquaeolei gen. nov., sp. nov., an aerobic, halophilic bacterium isolated from a subterranean brine [CLS] .\nArhodomonas aquaeolei gen. nov., sp. nov., isolated from a petroleum reservoir production fluid, is described. The single isolate was an obligately halophilic, aerobic, gram-negative, oval rod-shaped bacterium that was", " [CLS] Arhodomonas aquaeolei gen. nov., sp. nov., isolated from a petroleum reservoir production fluid [CLS] , is described. The single isolate was an obligately halophilic, aerobic, gram-negative, oval rod-shaped bacterium that was actively motile by means of a single polar flagellum. It was catalase and"]]
["bb_train_177", [" [CLS] Arhodomonas aquaeolei gen. nov., sp. nov., an aerobic [CLS] , halophilic bacterium isolated from a subterranean brine.\nArhodomonas aquaeolei gen. nov., sp. nov., isolated from a petroleum reservoir production fluid, is described. The single isolate was an obligately halophilic,", " [CLS] Arhodomonas aquaeolei gen. nov., sp. nov., an aerobic, halophilic [CLS]  bacterium isolated from a subterranean brine.\nArhodomonas aquaeolei gen. nov., sp. nov., isolated from a petroleum reservoir production fluid, is described. The single isolate was an obligately halophilic, aerobic,", " [CLS] Arhodomonas aquaeolei gen. nov., sp. nov., isolated from a petroleum reservoir production fluid, is described. The single isolate was an obligately halophilic, aerobic, gram-negative, oval rod-shaped bacterium that was actively motile [CLS]  by means of a single polar flagellum. It was catalase and oxidase positive. The isolate had a specific requirement for NaCl; growth occurred at NaCl concentrations between 6 and", " [CLS] Arhodomonas aquaeolei gen. nov., sp. nov., isolated from a petroleum reservoir production fluid, is described. The single isolate was an obligately halophilic, aerobic, gram-negative, oval rod-shaped bacterium that was actively motile by means of a single polar flagellum. It was catalase and oxidase positive [CLS] . The isolate had a specific requirement for NaCl; growth occurred at NaCl concentrations between 6 and 20%, and optimal growth occurred in the presence of 15% NaCl. This species", " [CLS] Arhodomonas aquaeolei gen. nov., sp. nov., isolated from a petroleum reservoir production fluid, is described. The single isolate was an obligately halophilic, aerobic, gram-negative, oval rod-shaped [CLS]  bacterium that was actively motile by means of a single polar flagellum. It was catalase and oxidase positive. The isolate had a specific requirement for NaCl; growth occurred at", " [CLS] Arhodomonas aquaeolei gen. nov., sp. nov., isolated from a petroleum reservoir production fluid, is described. The single isolate was an obligately halophilic, aerobic, gram-negative, oval rod-shaped bacterium that was actively motile by means of a single polar flagellum. It was catalase and oxidase positive [CLS] . The isolate had a specific requirement for NaCl; growth occurred at NaCl concentrations between 6 and 20%, and optimal growth occurred in the presence of 15% NaCl. This species", " [CLS] Arhodomonas aquaeolei gen. nov., sp. nov., isolated from a petroleum reservoir production fluid, is described. The single isolate was an obligately halophilic [CLS] , aerobic, gram-negative, oval rod-shaped bacterium that was actively motile by means of a single polar flagellum. It was catalase and oxidase positive. The isolate had a specific requirement for", " [CLS] Arhodomonas aquaeolei gen. nov., sp. nov., isolated from a petroleum reservoir production fluid, is described. The single isolate was an obligately halophilic, aerobic [CLS] , gram-negative, oval rod-shaped bacterium that was actively motile by means of a single polar flagellum. It was catalase and oxidase positive. The isolate had a specific requirement for NaCl;", " [CLS] Arhodomonas aquaeolei gen. nov., sp. nov., isolated from a petroleum reservoir production fluid, is described. The single isolate was an obligately halophilic, aerobic, gram-negative [CLS] , oval rod-shaped bacterium that was actively motile by means of a single polar flagellum. It was catalase and oxidase positive. The isolate had a specific requirement for NaCl; growth"]]
["bb_train_178", [" is proposed for the new genus, which was placed in the gamma subclass of the Proteobacteria on the basis of the results of a 16S rRNA sequence analysis. Although  [CLS] A. aquaeolei is most closely related to purple sulfur bacteria (the genera Ectothiorhodospira and Chromatium), it is not a phototrophic microorganism, which is consistent with its isolation from a subterranean environment [CLS] . The major components of its cellular fatty acids were C16:0, C18:1, C19:0, C16:1, and C18:0 acids. The DNA base composition of the type strain is 67 mol% G+C. The"]]
["bb_train_179", [" of 17 patients with duodenal ulcers the authors investigated the effect of omeprazole on (1) healing of duodenal ulcers and bulbitis after 2-4 weeks of therapy, (2) elimination of  [CLS] Helicobacter pylori in the antrum [CLS] , (3) chronic antral gastritis. Ad 1. After two weeks of treatment the authors found that 5 of 17 chronic duodenal ulcers were healed in the remainder substantial regression was", " [CLS] Helicobacter pylori is the primary determinant of spontaneous gastric hypoacidity in human immunodeficiency virus-infected outpatients [CLS] .\nTo investigate the incidence and demographics of gastric hypoacidity among persons infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), 146 asymptomatic subjects were evaluated with use of a radiotelemetry device (Heidelberg"]]
["bb_train_180", [" ulcers (P < 0.001), i. e. 94%. In subjects with ulcers and bulbitis (12 patients) the ulcer healed in 11 instances, in 7 patients residual bulbitis persisted. Ad 2.  [CLS] H. pylori was detected before treatment in 16 of 17 patients [CLS] , after treatment only in 5 (P < 0.001). Ad 3. Chronic gastritis was recorded before treatment in all patients. Treatment reduced its activity and the presence of H. pylori.", " H. pylori was detected before treatment in 16 of 17 patients, after treatment only in 5 (P < 0.001). Ad 3. Chronic gastritis was recorded before treatment in all  [CLS] patients. Treatment reduced its activity and the presence of H. pylori [CLS] .\n\n", " subjects (17%). Demographic characteristics, CD4 cell counts, and Helicobacter pylori serological status were evaluated for an association with gastric pH. Subjects with hypoacidity were more likely to have positive  [CLS] H. pylori serology than were subjects without hypoacidity [CLS]  (15 of 24 vs. 23 of 74, respectively; P = .004). Multivariate analysis indicated that a positive H. pylori serology was the most significant predictor of hypoacidity, accounting for", " pH of > or = 3) occurred in 24 subjects (17%). Demographic characteristics, CD4 cell counts, and Helicobacter pylori serological status were evaluated for an association with gastric pH.  [CLS] Subjects with hypoacidity were more likely to have positive H. pylori [CLS]  serology than were subjects without hypoacidity (15 of 24 vs. 23 of 74, respectively; P = .004). Multivariate analysis indicated that a positive H. pylori serology was the most", " heterosexual transmission of HIV, and male gender were also associated with an elevated gastric pH. CD4 cell counts did not contribute to predictions of gastric pH. A history of  [CLS] H. pylori infection is relatively common in HIV-positive black and Hispanic populations [CLS]  and is a predictor of gastric pH.\n\n", " heterosexual transmission of HIV, and male gender were also associated with an elevated gastric pH. CD4 cell counts did not contribute to predictions of gastric pH. A history of  [CLS] H. pylori infection is relatively common in HIV-positive black and Hispanic populations [CLS]  and is a predictor of gastric pH.\n\n"]]
["bb_train_181", [" [CLS] Respiratory carriage of Kingella kingae [CLS]  among healthy children.\nThe role of Kingella kingae as an invasive pathogen of young children is being increasingly recognized, but the niche of the organism in the respiratory tract", " [CLS] Kingella kingae among healthy children [CLS] .\nThe role of Kingella kingae as an invasive pathogen of young children is being increasingly recognized, but the niche of the organism in the respiratory tract and its prevalence", " [CLS] Kingella kingae as an invasive pathogen of young children is being increasingly recognized, but the niche of the organism in the respiratory tract [CLS]  and its prevalence in the normal flora of children remain unknown. To investigate these two aspects throat and nasopharyngeal cultures were obtained every 2 weeks from two cohorts of", " [CLS] Kingella kingae as an invasive pathogen of young children [CLS]  is being increasingly recognized, but the niche of the organism in the respiratory tract and its prevalence in the normal flora of children remain unknown. To investigate these two"]]
["bb_train_182", [" [CLS] Kingella kingae as an invasive pathogen of young children [CLS]  is being increasingly recognized, but the niche of the organism in the respiratory tract and its prevalence in the normal flora of children remain unknown. To investigate these two"]]
["bb_train_183", [" than 6 months attending a well-baby-care clinic for routine vaccinations. During an 11-month follow-up 109 of 624 (27.5%) throat cultures but none of the nasopharyngeal cultures obtained from 48  [CLS] day-care center attendees grew K. kingae [CLS] . The monthly prevalence of K. kingae ranged from 6.1 to 34.6% with December and April peaks. Overall 35 of 48 (72.9%) children had at least one positive culture for", " antibiotics during the previous 30 days and from healthy infants younger than 6 months attending a well-baby-care clinic for routine vaccinations. During an 11-month follow-up 109 of 624 (27.5%)  [CLS] throat cultures but none of the nasopharyngeal cultures obtained from 48 day-care center attendees grew K. kingae [CLS] . The monthly prevalence of K. kingae ranged from 6.1 to 34.6% with December and April peaks. Overall 35 of 48 (72.9%) children had at least one positive culture for", " antibiotics during the previous 30 days and from healthy infants younger than 6 months attending a well-baby-care clinic for routine vaccinations. During an 11-month follow-up 109 of 624 (27.5%)  [CLS] throat cultures but none of the nasopharyngeal cultures obtained from 48 day-care center attendees grew K. kingae [CLS] . The monthly prevalence of K. kingae ranged from 6.1 to 34.6% with December and April peaks. Overall 35 of 48 (72.9%) children had at least one positive culture for", " During an 11-month follow-up 109 of 624 (27.5%) throat cultures but none of the nasopharyngeal cultures obtained from 48 day-care center attendees grew K. kingae. The monthly prevalence of  [CLS] K. kingae ranged from 6.1 to 34.6% with December and April peaks. Overall 35 of 48 (72.9%) children [CLS]  had at least one positive culture for the organism. Among the 27 children who had > or = 2 positive cultures, continuous and intermittent patterns of carriage were observed.", " During an 11-month follow-up 109 of 624 (27.5%) throat cultures but none of the nasopharyngeal cultures obtained from 48 day-care center attendees grew K. kingae. The monthly prevalence of  [CLS] K. kingae ranged from 6.1 to 34.6% with December and April peaks. Overall 35 of 48 (72.9%) children had at least one positive culture for the organism. Among the 27 children [CLS]  who had > or = 2 positive cultures, continuous and intermittent patterns of carriage were observed. None of the colonized children experienced an invasive K. kingae infection. The prevalence", " organism. Among the 27 children who had > or = 2 positive cultures, continuous and intermittent patterns of carriage were observed. None of the colonized children experienced an invasive  [CLS] K. kingae infection. The prevalence of pharyngeal carriage among surgical patients [CLS]  was 8.0%, and the organism was not isolated from any of the infants younger than 6 months attending the well-baby-care clinic.\n\n", " organism. Among the 27 children who had > or = 2 positive cultures, continuous and intermittent patterns of carriage were observed. None of the colonized children experienced an invasive  [CLS] K. kingae infection. The prevalence of pharyngeal [CLS]  carriage among surgical patients was 8.0%, and the organism was not isolated from any of the infants younger than 6 months attending the well-baby-care clinic.\n\n"]]
["bb_train_184", [" [CLS] Non-O1 Vibrio cholerae bacteremia in patients with cirrhosis [CLS] : 5-yr experience from a single medical center.\nTo assess the clinical features and susceptibility of cirrhotic patients to non-O1 Vibrio cholerae bacteremia and to provide our therapeutic experiences in"]]
["bb_train_185", ["\nTo assess the clinical features and susceptibility of cirrhotic patients to non-O1 Vibrio cholerae bacteremia and to provide our therapeutic experiences in this rare and high lethal infection.\nTwenty-eight  [CLS] blood culture isolates of non-O1 V. cholerae [CLS]  were identified by our clinical microbiology laboratory between July 1989 and June 1994. Patients with underlying cirrhosis and the aforementioned bacteremia were retrospectively reviewed.\nTwenty-one cirrhotic patients (16 male,", "\nTo assess the clinical features and susceptibility of cirrhotic patients to non-O1 Vibrio cholerae bacteremia and to provide our therapeutic experiences in this rare and high lethal infection.\nTwenty-eight  [CLS] blood culture isolates of non-O1 V. cholerae [CLS]  were identified by our clinical microbiology laboratory between July 1989 and June 1994. Patients with underlying cirrhosis and the aforementioned bacteremia were retrospectively reviewed.\nTwenty-one cirrhotic patients (16 male,", " features and susceptibility of cirrhotic patients to non-O1 Vibrio cholerae bacteremia and to provide our therapeutic experiences in this rare and high lethal infection.\nTwenty-eight blood culture isolates of  [CLS] non-O1 V. cholerae were identified by our clinical microbiology laboratory between July 1989 and June 1994. Patients with underlying cirrhosis and the aforementioned bacteremia [CLS]  were retrospectively reviewed.\nTwenty-one cirrhotic patients (16 male, five female; mean age, 50.9 yr; range 28-67 yr) were identified and classified as Child B (6 cases) and Child C", " with gentamicin or ceftriaxone alone) cured most of the bacteremic episodes. The overall case-fatality rate was 23.8%, but 75% of the deaths were observed in patients with skin manifestation.\n [CLS] Patients with decompensated cirrhosis are susceptible to non-O1 V. cholerae [CLS]  bacteremia and should not ingest raw seafood or expose skin wounds to salt water. A high index of suspicion and early administration of antibiotics may lower the mortality rate."]]
["bb_train_186", [" [CLS] BCG granulomatous lesions [CLS] .\nRecent studies in man and animal models have demonstrated that TCR-gamma delta-bearing T cells (gamma delta T cells) are activated by mycobacteria and accumulate in the sites of mycobacterial", " T cells remains unclear, some data suggest a potential role for these cells in the granulomatous immune response. To address the presence of gamma delta T cells within the  [CLS] BCG granulomas [CLS] , we have characterized the TCR phenotype of T-lymphocytes present in the BCG granulomatous lesion immunohistochemically using a monoclonal antibody to TCR delta 1 and others. Fairly large numbers of", " in the granulomatous immune response. To address the presence of gamma delta T cells within the BCG granulomas, we have characterized the TCR phenotype of T-lymphocytes present in the  [CLS] BCG granulomatous lesion [CLS]  immunohistochemically using a monoclonal antibody to TCR delta 1 and others. Fairly large numbers of gamma delta T cells were located at the periphery of the BCG granulomas without", " BCG granulomatous lesion immunohistochemically using a monoclonal antibody to TCR delta 1 and others. Fairly large numbers of gamma delta T cells were located at the periphery of the  [CLS] BCG granulomas without necrosis [CLS]  and most of them also expressed CD8. However, gamma delta T cells were rarely present in the granulomas with central caseous necrosis, calcification and fibrotic changes. With these results,", " present in the granulomas with central caseous necrosis, calcification and fibrotic changes. With these results, it might be speculated that the CD8+ gamma delta T lymphocytes participate in the  [CLS] BCG granuloma [CLS]  formation mainly in the early stage.\n\n"]]
["bb_train_187", [" [CLS] animal models have demonstrated that TCR-gamma delta-bearing T cells (gamma delta T cells) are activated by mycobacteria [CLS]  and accumulate in the sites of mycobacterial infection. Although the function of gamma delta T cells remains unclear, some data suggest a potential role for these cells in the", " [CLS] man and animal models have demonstrated that TCR-gamma delta-bearing T cells (gamma delta T cells) are activated by mycobacteria [CLS]  and accumulate in the sites of mycobacterial infection. Although the function of gamma delta T cells remains unclear, some data suggest a potential role for these cells in the"]]
["bb_train_188", [" [CLS] animal models have demonstrated that TCR-gamma delta-bearing T cells (gamma delta T cells) are activated by mycobacteria and accumulate in the sites of mycobacterial [CLS]  infection. Although the function of gamma delta T cells remains unclear, some data suggest a potential role for these cells in the granulomatous immune response. To address the presence", " [CLS] man and animal models have demonstrated that TCR-gamma delta-bearing T cells (gamma delta T cells) are activated by mycobacteria and accumulate in the sites of mycobacterial [CLS]  infection. Although the function of gamma delta T cells remains unclear, some data suggest a potential role for these cells in the granulomatous immune response. To address the presence"]]
["bb_train_189", [" [CLS] Helicobacter pullorum from patients with enteritis [CLS] .\nHelicobacter pullorum, recently described as sp. nov., is commonly isolated from asymptomatic poultry. Two cases of human enteritis associated with H. pullorum, one of them in an immunocompromised patient,", " [CLS] Helicobacter pullorum, recently described as sp. nov., is commonly isolated from asymptomatic poultry [CLS] . Two cases of human enteritis associated with H. pullorum, one of them in an immunocompromised patient, are reported. Problems in the correct species identification by means of phenotypic and"]]
["bb_train_190", [" [CLS] H. pullorum, one of them in an immunocompromised patient [CLS] , are reported. Problems in the correct species identification by means of phenotypic and genotypic methods are discussed and for the first time a fatty acid pattern of Helicobacter pullorum", " [CLS] human enteritis associated with H. pullorum [CLS] , one of them in an immunocompromised patient, are reported. Problems in the correct species identification by means of phenotypic and genotypic methods are discussed and for the first time"]]
["bb_train_191", [" [CLS] Agrobacterium rhizogenes TR-DNA has different morphogenetic activity in tobacco [CLS]  than rolB.\nAgrobacterium rhizogenes strains of the agropine type harbor on their Ri-plasmid two T-DNAs, a left TL-DNA and a right TR-DNA. The rolB gene of the TL-DNA is"]]
["bb_train_192", [" [CLS] Gingivomandibular infection due to Mycobacterium kansasii [CLS]  in a patient with AIDS.\n\n", " [CLS] Mycobacterium kansasii in a patient with AIDS [CLS] .\n\n"]]
["bb_train_193", [" [CLS] streptomycin-resistant strain of Bacillus intermedius S3-19 [CLS]  and purified as a homogeneous preparation by ion-exchange chromatography and FPLC. Electrophoresis and gel-filtration revealed that the active enzyme is a monomer with molecular weight of 46-47 kD. The"]]
["bb_train_194", [" yoghurt and also receive \nincreasing attention because of their beneficial properties for health. \nFor lactic acid bacteria, the production of EPS is well studied. \nHowever, for  [CLS] dairy propionibacteria [CLS]  the biosynthesis of EPS is poorly \ndocumented. A polysaccharide synthase-encoding gene was identified in \nthe genome of Propionibacterium freudenreichii subsp. shermanii TL 34 (CIP 103027). This gene", " [CLS] Dairy\n propionibacteria [CLS]  have been shown to be able to produce EPS, although \nthe biosynthesis mechanism involved is poorly documented. Recently, the \nstructure of excreted EPS by P. freudenreichii subsp."]]
["bb_train_195", [" polysaccharide synthase-encoding gene was identified in \nthe genome of Propionibacterium freudenreichii subsp. shermanii TL 34 (CIP 103027). This gene best aligns with Tts, the polysaccharide synthase gene of  [CLS] Streptococcus pneumoniae\n type 37 that is responsible for the production of a \u03b2-glucan capsular \npolysaccharide [CLS] . PCR amplification showed the presence of an internal \nfragment of this gene in twelve strains of P. freudenreichii subsp. shermanii\n with a ropy phenotype in YEL+ medium."]]
["bb_train_196", [" that is responsible for the production of a \u03b2-glucan capsular \npolysaccharide. PCR amplification showed the presence of an internal \nfragment of this gene in twelve strains of  [CLS] P. freudenreichii subsp. shermanii\n with a ropy phenotype in YEL+ medium [CLS] . The gene sequence is highly \nconserved, as less than 1% of nucleotides differed among the 10 strains \ncontaining the complete gtf gene. The same primers failed to"]]
["bb_train_197", [" that is responsible for the production of a \u03b2-glucan capsular \npolysaccharide. PCR amplification showed the presence of an internal \nfragment of this gene in twelve strains of  [CLS] P. freudenreichii subsp. shermanii\n with a ropy phenotype [CLS]  in YEL+ medium. The gene sequence is highly \nconserved, as less than 1% of nucleotides differed among the 10 strains \ncontaining the complete gtf gene. The same", " that is responsible for the production of a \u03b2-glucan capsular \npolysaccharide. PCR amplification showed the presence of an internal \nfragment of this gene in twelve strains of  [CLS] P. freudenreichii subsp. shermanii\n with a ropy phenotype in YEL+ medium. The gene sequence is highly \nconserved, as less than 1% of nucleotides differed among the 10 strains \ncontaining the complete gtf gene. The same primers failed to detect the gene in Propionibacterium acidipropionici strain TL 47, which is known to excrete exopolysaccharides in milk. The presence of (1\u21923, 1\u21922)-\u03b2-d-glucan capsule [CLS]  was demonstrated for 7 out of 12 strains by agglutination with a S. pneumoniae-type\n 37-specific antiserum. The presence of mRNA corresponding to the gene \nwas detected by"]]
["bb_train_198", [" highly \nconserved, as less than 1% of nucleotides differed among the 10 strains \ncontaining the complete gtf gene. The same primers failed to detect the gene in  [CLS] Propionibacterium acidipropionici strain TL 47, which is known to excrete exopolysaccharides in milk [CLS] . The presence of (1\u21923, 1\u21922)-\u03b2-d-glucan capsule was demonstrated for 7 out of 12 strains by agglutination with a S. pneumoniae-type\n 37-specific antiserum. The presence of mRNA corresponding to"]]
["bb_train_199", [" shermanii was studied by NMR, showing a homopolysaccharide with the structure [\u21923)[\u03b2-d-Glcp-(1\u21922)]-\u03b2-d-Glcp-(1\u2192] ( Nordmark et al., 2005).\n To date, no data are available concerning the genes responsible for  [CLS] EPS\n biosynthesis by propionibacteria [CLS] . In this work, 20% of the tested \nstrains of P. freudenreichii subsp. shermanii, including the sequenced type strain TL 34 ( Meurice et al., 2004), were identified as"]]
["bb_train_200", [" concerning the genes responsible for EPS\n biosynthesis by propionibacteria. In this work, 20% of the tested \nstrains of P. freudenreichii subsp. shermanii, including the sequenced type strain  [CLS] TL 34 ( Meurice et al., 2004), were identified as \u201cropy-producing [CLS] \u201d, suggesting the production of EPS.\n"]]
["bb_train_201", [" [CLS] Psychrobacter celer and Hafnia alvei) inoculated as part of the whole microbial community of an experimental smear soft cheese [CLS] \n", " problems have been linked to the presence of this species as of this time.The objective of this study was to determine the capacity of colonization of two Gram-negative bacteria,  [CLS] Psychrobacter celer and H. alvei,\n and their impact on the growth of other microbial populations and on \naroma compound production at the surface of experimental smear soft \ncheese. These bacteria were isolated from cheeses [CLS]  and chosen on the \nbasis of their low potential sanitary risk evaluated in the study of  Coton et al.\n", " problems have been linked to the presence of this species as of this time.The objective of this study was to determine the capacity of colonization of two Gram-negative bacteria,  [CLS] Psychrobacter celer and H. alvei,\n and their impact on the growth of other microbial populations and on \naroma compound production at the surface of experimental smear soft \ncheese [CLS] . These bacteria were isolated from cheeses and chosen on the \nbasis of their low potential sanitary risk evaluated in the study of  Coton et al.\n", " problems have been linked to the presence of this species as of this time.The objective of this study was to determine the capacity of colonization of two Gram-negative bacteria,  [CLS] Psychrobacter celer and H. alvei,\n and their impact on the growth of other microbial populations and on \naroma compound production at the surface of experimental smear soft \ncheese [CLS] . These bacteria were isolated from cheeses and chosen on the \nbasis of their low potential sanitary risk evaluated in the study of  Coton et al.\n"]]
["bb_train_202", [" [CLS] Gram-negative bacteria (Psychrobacter celer [CLS]  and Hafnia alvei) inoculated as part of the whole microbial community of an experimental smear soft cheese\n", " no sanitary problems have been linked to the presence of this species as of this time.The objective of this study was to determine the capacity of colonization of two  [CLS] Gram-negative bacteria, Psychrobacter celer [CLS]  and H. alvei,\n and their impact on the growth of other microbial populations and on \naroma compound production at the surface of experimental smear soft \ncheese."]]
["bb_train_203", [" [CLS] Hafnia alvei) inoculated as part of the whole microbial community of an experimental smear soft cheese [CLS] \n", "\nsuch as alcohols or esters and, consequently, may have a negative effect\n on the organoleptic characteristics of cheeses. Other bacteria \nbelonging of the Enterobacteriaceae family such as  [CLS] Hafnia alvei are able to produce flavor compounds ( Morales et al., 2004) but may also lead to stronger proteolysis, thus modifying the final texture of the cheese [CLS]  (Morales et al., 2003). A strain of Psychrobacter sp., isolated from cheese, was inoculated with a yeast at a high concentration in model cheese ( Deetae et al., 2009a).", " [CLS] Hafnia alvei reduced STEC O26:H11 counts by 1.4\u20132.5 log cfu g\u22121\n and to a lesser extent STEC O157:H7 counts in pasteurized milk cheeses [CLS] .\n"]]
["bb_train_204", [" [CLS] Gram-negative bacteria (Psychrobacter celer and Hafnia alvei [CLS] ) inoculated as part of the whole microbial community of an experimental smear soft cheese\n"]]
["bb_train_205", [" [CLS] P. celer was able to successfully implant \nitself in cheese [CLS] , regardless of its inoculation level. However, when it \nwas inoculated at a high level, the bacterial biodiversity was \ndrastically lowered from day 25 to the end of", " [CLS] cheese, regardless of its inoculation level. However, when it \nwas inoculated at a high level, the bacterial biodiversity was \ndrastically lowered from day 25 to the end of ripening. Overall, the \npresence of P. celer [CLS]  led to the higher production of volatile \naroma compounds such as aldehydes, ketones and sulfur compounds. \nRegardless of its inoculation level, H. alvei barely affected \nthe", " had a major effect on the counts and distributions of C. variabile/C. casei ( Table 1, T and PC2). These bacterial strains were not detected in the presence of  [CLS] P. celer in the cheese [CLS]  ecosystem.\n", " [CLS] community \nwith P. celer [CLS] .\n", " [CLS] P. celer and H. alvei in a complex cheese [CLS]  community for the first time and the contribution of these species to the flavor properties of the cheeses.\n", " [CLS] P. celer and H. alvei in a complex cheese community for the first time and the contribution of these species to the flavor properties of the cheeses [CLS] .\n", " [CLS] P. celer and H. alvei in a complex cheese community [CLS]  for the first time and the contribution of these species to the flavor properties of the cheeses.\n", " [CLS] cheese ripening in the \npresence of P. celer [CLS]  were branched-chain aldehydes such as \n3-methyl butanal and ketones.\n", " reported in P. phenylpyruvica in a cured meat model system ( Moller et al., 1998), and in Psychrobacter sp. in a model cheese ( Deetae et al., 2009a). When  [CLS] P. celer\n was present in cheeses [CLS] , 2-pentanone, 2-heptanone and 2-nonanone were \nproduced in greater quantities than in the control cheeses.\n"]]
["bb_train_206", [" [CLS] cheese, regardless of its inoculation level. However, when it \nwas inoculated at a high level, the bacterial biodiversity was \ndrastically lowered from day 25 to the end of ripening. Overall, the \npresence of P. celer led to the higher production of volatile \naroma compounds such as aldehydes, ketones and sulfur compounds. \nRegardless of its inoculation level, H. alvei [CLS]  barely affected \nthe growth of the bacterial community and was subdominant at the end of \nripening. It influenced total volatile aroma compound production with \nvolatile sulfur", " linked to the presence of this species as of this time.The objective of this study was to determine the capacity of colonization of two Gram-negative bacteria, Psychrobacter celer and  [CLS] H. alvei,\n and their impact on the growth of other microbial populations and on \naroma compound production at the surface of experimental smear soft \ncheese. These bacteria were isolated from cheeses [CLS]  and chosen on the \nbasis of their low potential sanitary risk evaluated in the study of  Coton et al.\n", " linked to the presence of this species as of this time.The objective of this study was to determine the capacity of colonization of two Gram-negative bacteria, Psychrobacter celer and  [CLS] H. alvei,\n and their impact on the growth of other microbial populations and on \naroma compound production at the surface of experimental smear soft \ncheese [CLS] . These bacteria were isolated from cheeses and chosen on the \nbasis of their low potential sanitary risk evaluated in the study of  Coton et al.\n", " linked to the presence of this species as of this time.The objective of this study was to determine the capacity of colonization of two Gram-negative bacteria, Psychrobacter celer and  [CLS] H. alvei,\n and their impact on the growth of other microbial populations and on \naroma compound production at the surface of experimental smear soft \ncheese [CLS] . These bacteria were isolated from cheeses and chosen on the \nbasis of their low potential sanitary risk evaluated in the study of  Coton et al.\n", " the cheese surface \nwith 6.4 log10 cfu/g. However, from day 15 to day 35, distribution of \nbacterial species between the cheese without H. alvei (T) and the  [CLS] cheese with H. alvei [CLS]  (HA2) was different. In the absence of H. alvei, A. arilaitensis dominated the cheese surface with counts of 9.3 log10 cfu/g at day 35. With H. alvei in the", " cheese with H. alvei (HA2) was different. In the absence of H. alvei, A. arilaitensis dominated the cheese surface with counts of 9.3 log10 cfu/g at day 35. With  [CLS] H. alvei in the cheese [CLS]  ecosystem, the maximal population of A. arilaitensis was 7.4 log10 cfu/g at day 35.\n", " [CLS] community containing H. alvei [CLS] \n (inoculated at a low or high level) produced the largest quantity of \naroma compounds \u2013 between 13 and 15 mg/kg of total aroma compounds \u2013\n primarily", " [CLS] H. alvei in a complex cheese [CLS]  community for the first time and the contribution of these species to the flavor properties of the cheeses.\n", " [CLS] H. alvei in a complex cheese community for the first time and the contribution of these species to the flavor properties of the cheeses [CLS] .\n", " [CLS] H. alvei in a complex cheese community [CLS]  for the first time and the contribution of these species to the flavor properties of the cheeses.\n", " [CLS] H. alvei\n was able to successfully establish itself in the community [CLS]  at the \nbeginning of ripening, regardless of the inoculation level.\n", " [CLS] H. alvei at the end of ripening of Livarot cheese ( Mounier et al., 2009) and a Spanish farmhouse cheese [CLS] , but in small counts of approximately 105 ufc/g (Abriouel et al., 2008).\n", " [CLS] H. alvei at the end of ripening of Livarot cheese [CLS]  ( Mounier et al., 2009) and a Spanish farmhouse cheese, but in small counts of approximately 105 ufc/g (Abriouel et al., 2008).\n", " [CLS] H. alvei\n in the cheese community [CLS] , regardless of its inoculation level, had a \nsignificant effect on the volatile compound content of cheeses with a \nhigher production of total volatile compounds, mainly volatile sulfur", " [CLS] H. alvei\n in the cheese community, regardless of its inoculation level, had a \nsignificant effect on the volatile compound content of cheeses [CLS]  with a \nhigher production of total volatile compounds, mainly volatile sulfur \ncompounds (VSC).\n", " [CLS] H. alvei\n in the cheese [CLS]  community, regardless of its inoculation level, had a \nsignificant effect on the volatile compound content of cheeses with a \nhigher production of total volatile compounds, mainly volatile", " to convert \nmethionine or cysteine into aroma compounds with a transamination or \ndeamination activity. It was previously shown that VSC (methanethiol, \nDMDS, DMTS) were produced by  [CLS] H. alvei but grown on beef models [CLS]  ( Dainty et al., 1989).\n"]]
["bb_train_207", [" [CLS] milk coagulation, lactic acid bacteria such as Lactococcus lactis [CLS]  acidify curd by metabolizing the lactose into lactate. Then, at the beginning of the ripening process, acid-tolerant yeasts (Debaryomyces hansenii, Geotrichum candidum, Kluyveromyces sp. and Yarrowia lipolytica) dominate the", " [CLS] Lactococcus lactis acidify curd [CLS]  by metabolizing the lactose into lactate. Then, at the beginning of the ripening process, acid-tolerant yeasts (Debaryomyces hansenii, Geotrichum candidum, Kluyveromyces sp. and Yarrowia lipolytica) dominate the surface and", " [CLS] Lactococcus lactis. Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis survives better in cheese [CLS]  than Lc. lactis subsp. cremoris [8].\n This fact even though not examined in the present study suggests that \nthe level of autolysis of the latter is the", " was probably \nmanufactured with a thermophilic lactic starter culture, since Streptococcus thermophilus and Lactobacillus delbrueckii species were the dominant lactic acid bacteria, in contrast to the two other  [CLS] cheeses, in which Lactococcus lactis [CLS]  was the dominant lactic acid bacterium. Strains related to other reference strains sequenced in the present study, such as Psychrobacter aquimaris, Brachybacterium tyrofermentans, Corynebacterium ammoniagenes, Brevibacterium antiquum, Microbacterium gubbeenense,", " [CLS] Lactococcus lactis, \nLactococcus garvieae, Leuconostoc pseudomesenteroides, Leuconostoc \ncitreum, Lactobacillus sp, Carnobacterium mobile, Enterococcus faecalis,\n Enterococcus faecium, Macrococcus caseolyticus and Hafnia alvei reduced STEC O26:H11 counts by 1.4\u20132.5 log cfu g\u22121\n and to a lesser extent STEC O157:H7 counts in pasteurized milk cheeses [CLS] .\n"]]
["bb_train_208", [" [CLS] lactic acid bacteria such as Lactococcus lactis [CLS]  acidify curd by metabolizing the lactose into lactate. Then, at the beginning of the ripening process, acid-tolerant yeasts (Debaryomyces hansenii, Geotrichum candidum, Kluyveromyces sp. and Yarrowia lipolytica) dominate the", "\nmanufactured with a thermophilic lactic starter culture, since Streptococcus thermophilus and Lactobacillus delbrueckii species were the dominant lactic acid bacteria, in contrast to the two other cheeses, in which  [CLS] Lactococcus lactis was the dominant lactic acid bacterium [CLS] . Strains related to other reference strains sequenced in the present study, such as Psychrobacter aquimaris, Brachybacterium tyrofermentans, Corynebacterium ammoniagenes, Brevibacterium antiquum, Microbacterium gubbeenense, Brochothrix thermosphacta and Marinilactibacillus psychrotolerans, were", " [CLS] production of exopolysaccharides by LAB has been correlated to specific gene clusters tagged as eps or cps, located, as in Streptococcus thermophilus or Lactobacillus plantarum, mainly on the bacterial chromosome (Stingele et al. 1996; De Vuyst and Degeest 1999; Siezen et al. 2010) or in species such as Lactococcus lactis [CLS]  and Pediococcus damnsosus predominantly on plasmids (Van Kranenburg et al. 1997, 1999b). Remus et al. (2012) identified four cps genes clusters in the chromosome of L. plantarum WCFS1, which", " [CLS] LAB has been correlated to specific gene clusters tagged as eps or cps, located, as in Streptococcus thermophilus or Lactobacillus plantarum, mainly on the bacterial chromosome (Stingele et al. 1996; De Vuyst and Degeest 1999; Siezen et al. 2010) or in species such as Lactococcus lactis [CLS]  and Pediococcus damnsosus predominantly on plasmids (Van Kranenburg et al. 1997, 1999b). Remus et al. (2012) identified four cps genes clusters in the chromosome of L. plantarum WCFS1, which"]]
["bb_train_209", [" [CLS] Debaryomyces hansenii, Geotrichum candidum, Kluyveromyces sp. and Yarrowia lipolytica) dominate the surface and metabolize lactate ( Corsetti et al., 2001, Mounier et al., 2005 and Larpin et al., 2006).\n This utilization leads to the deacidification of the cheese surface [CLS] , \nallowing the development of less acid-tolerant, aerobic or facultative \nanaerobic, catalase-positive, halo-tolerant Gram-positive bacteria. \nBacteria such as Brevibacterium aurantiacum, Corynebacterium, Arthrobacter and Staphylococcus spp.\n are", " [CLS] Debaryomyces hansenii, Geotrichum candidum, Kluyveromyces sp. and Yarrowia lipolytica) dominate the surface and metabolize lactate ( Corsetti et al., 2001, Mounier et al., 2005 and Larpin et al., 2006).\n This utilization leads to the deacidification of the cheese [CLS]  surface, \nallowing the development of less acid-tolerant, aerobic or facultative \nanaerobic, catalase-positive, halo-tolerant Gram-positive bacteria. \nBacteria such as Brevibacterium aurantiacum, Corynebacterium, Arthrobacter and Staphylococcus spp.\n", " and Proteus vulgaris\n were found on one of the farmhouse cheeses. The surface yeast \nmicrobiota consisted primarily of one dominating species for each \ncheese. For the  [CLS] farmhouse cheeses, the dominant yeast species were Yarrowia lipolytica, Geotrichum spp. and Debaryomyces hansenii [CLS] , respectively, and for the cheese from the industrial dairy, D. hansenii was the dominant yeast species. Additionally, denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) analysis revealed that Streptococcus thermophilus was present", " [CLS] Debaryomyces hansenii for semi-soft cheeses [CLS]  and additionally Geotrichum candidum for soft cheeses) and coagulase-negative staphylococci (Staphylococcus equorum) are present [3, 21, 26]. Generally, D. hansenii\n and staphylococci on cheese surface are assumed to", " [CLS] Debaryomyces hansenii for semi-soft cheeses and additionally Geotrichum candidum for soft cheeses [CLS] ) and coagulase-negative staphylococci (Staphylococcus equorum) are present [3, 21, 26]. Generally, D. hansenii\n and staphylococci on cheese surface are assumed to originate from the \ncheese brine, which", " at the industrial dairy (dairy D) \nconsisted of only one single group. The cheese from dairy A was equally \ndominated by Yarrowia lipolytica and Scopulariopsis brevicaulis. The  [CLS] yeast microbiota on cheese from dairy B was primarily dominated by Geotrichum spp., however, Kluyveromyces marxianus and Debaryomyces hansenii [CLS]  were additionally found in minor amounts. The cheese from dairy C was dominated by D. hansenii followed by a minor group of Geothrichum spp. Finally, the cheese from dairy", " dairy (dairy D) \nconsisted of only one single group. The cheese from dairy A was equally \ndominated by Yarrowia lipolytica and Scopulariopsis brevicaulis. The yeast microbiota on  [CLS] cheese from dairy B was primarily dominated by Geotrichum spp., however, Kluyveromyces marxianus and Debaryomyces hansenii [CLS]  were additionally found in minor amounts. The cheese from dairy C was dominated by D. hansenii followed by a minor group of Geothrichum spp. Finally, the cheese from dairy", " [CLS] Debaryomyces hansenii and Geotrichum spp. are the dominating yeast species on surface-ripened cheeses [CLS] . D. hansenii was found to be the dominating yeast species on the cheeses from dairies C and D, whereas Geotrichum spp. was found to dominate on the cheese from", " [CLS] cheese \nsamples is sequenced, the high throughput sequencing may detect any type\n of DNA (bacteria, archaea, eukaryotes and viruses), provided that \nadequate references are used. Eukaryotes, such as Geotrichum candidum, Debaryomyces hansenii [CLS] , and Penicillium roqueforti,\n were found, which was not surprising, as these fungi are frequently \nused in cheesemaking.\n"]]
["bb_train_210", [" [CLS] acid-tolerant yeasts (Debaryomyces hansenii [CLS] , Geotrichum candidum, Kluyveromyces sp. and Yarrowia lipolytica) dominate the surface and metabolize lactate ( Corsetti et al., 2001, Mounier et al., 2005 and Larpin et al., 2006).\n This"]]
["bb_train_211", [" milk coagulation, lactic acid bacteria such as Lactococcus lactis acidify curd by metabolizing the lactose into lactate. Then, at the beginning of the ripening process, acid-tolerant yeasts (Debaryomyces hansenii,  [CLS] Geotrichum candidum, Kluyveromyces sp. and Yarrowia lipolytica) dominate the surface and metabolize lactate ( Corsetti et al., 2001, Mounier et al., 2005 and Larpin et al., 2006).\n This utilization leads to the deacidification of the cheese [CLS]  surface, \nallowing the development of less acid-tolerant, aerobic or facultative \nanaerobic, catalase-positive, halo-tolerant Gram-positive bacteria. \nBacteria such as Brevibacterium aurantiacum, Corynebacterium, Arthrobacter and Staphylococcus spp.\n", " milk coagulation, lactic acid bacteria such as Lactococcus lactis acidify curd by metabolizing the lactose into lactate. Then, at the beginning of the ripening process, acid-tolerant yeasts (Debaryomyces hansenii,  [CLS] Geotrichum candidum, Kluyveromyces sp. and Yarrowia lipolytica) dominate the surface and metabolize lactate ( Corsetti et al., 2001, Mounier et al., 2005 and Larpin et al., 2006).\n This utilization leads to the deacidification of the cheese surface [CLS] , \nallowing the development of less acid-tolerant, aerobic or facultative \nanaerobic, catalase-positive, halo-tolerant Gram-positive bacteria. \nBacteria such as Brevibacterium aurantiacum, Corynebacterium, Arthrobacter and Staphylococcus spp.\n are", " [CLS] Geotrichum candidum for soft cheeses [CLS] ) and coagulase-negative staphylococci (Staphylococcus equorum) are present [3, 21, 26]. Generally, D. hansenii\n and staphylococci on cheese surface are assumed to originate from the \ncheese brine, which", " [CLS] cheese \nsamples is sequenced, the high throughput sequencing may detect any type\n of DNA (bacteria, archaea, eukaryotes and viruses), provided that \nadequate references are used. Eukaryotes, such as Geotrichum candidum [CLS] , Debaryomyces hansenii, and Penicillium roqueforti,\n were found, which was not surprising, as these fungi are frequently \nused in cheesemaking.\n"]]
["bb_train_212", [" [CLS] acid-tolerant yeasts (Debaryomyces hansenii, Geotrichum candidum [CLS] , Kluyveromyces sp. and Yarrowia lipolytica) dominate the surface and metabolize lactate ( Corsetti et al., 2001, Mounier et al., 2005 and Larpin et al., 2006).\n This utilization leads"]]
["bb_train_213", [" lactic acid bacteria such as Lactococcus lactis acidify curd by metabolizing the lactose into lactate. Then, at the beginning of the ripening process, acid-tolerant yeasts (Debaryomyces hansenii, Geotrichum candidum,  [CLS] Kluyveromyces sp. and Yarrowia lipolytica) dominate the surface and metabolize lactate ( Corsetti et al., 2001, Mounier et al., 2005 and Larpin et al., 2006).\n This utilization leads to the deacidification of the cheese [CLS]  surface, \nallowing the development of less acid-tolerant, aerobic or facultative \nanaerobic, catalase-positive, halo-tolerant Gram-positive bacteria. \nBacteria such as Brevibacterium aurantiacum, Corynebacterium, Arthrobacter and Staphylococcus spp.\n", " lactic acid bacteria such as Lactococcus lactis acidify curd by metabolizing the lactose into lactate. Then, at the beginning of the ripening process, acid-tolerant yeasts (Debaryomyces hansenii, Geotrichum candidum,  [CLS] Kluyveromyces sp. and Yarrowia lipolytica) dominate the surface and metabolize lactate ( Corsetti et al., 2001, Mounier et al., 2005 and Larpin et al., 2006).\n This utilization leads to the deacidification of the cheese surface [CLS] , \nallowing the development of less acid-tolerant, aerobic or facultative \nanaerobic, catalase-positive, halo-tolerant Gram-positive bacteria. \nBacteria such as Brevibacterium aurantiacum, Corynebacterium, Arthrobacter and Staphylococcus spp.\n are"]]
["bb_train_214", [" [CLS] acid-tolerant yeasts (Debaryomyces hansenii, Geotrichum candidum, Kluyveromyces sp. [CLS]  and Yarrowia lipolytica) dominate the surface and metabolize lactate ( Corsetti et al., 2001, Mounier et al., 2005 and Larpin et al., 2006).\n This utilization leads to the"]]
["bb_train_215", [" such as Lactococcus lactis acidify curd by metabolizing the lactose into lactate. Then, at the beginning of the ripening process, acid-tolerant yeasts (Debaryomyces hansenii, Geotrichum candidum, Kluyveromyces sp. and  [CLS] Yarrowia lipolytica) dominate the surface and metabolize lactate ( Corsetti et al., 2001, Mounier et al., 2005 and Larpin et al., 2006).\n This utilization leads to the deacidification of the cheese [CLS]  surface, \nallowing the development of less acid-tolerant, aerobic or facultative \nanaerobic, catalase-positive, halo-tolerant Gram-positive bacteria. \nBacteria such as Brevibacterium aurantiacum, Corynebacterium, Arthrobacter and Staphylococcus spp.\n", " such as Lactococcus lactis acidify curd by metabolizing the lactose into lactate. Then, at the beginning of the ripening process, acid-tolerant yeasts (Debaryomyces hansenii, Geotrichum candidum, Kluyveromyces sp. and  [CLS] Yarrowia lipolytica) dominate the surface and metabolize lactate ( Corsetti et al., 2001, Mounier et al., 2005 and Larpin et al., 2006).\n This utilization leads to the deacidification of the cheese surface [CLS] , \nallowing the development of less acid-tolerant, aerobic or facultative \nanaerobic, catalase-positive, halo-tolerant Gram-positive bacteria. \nBacteria such as Brevibacterium aurantiacum, Corynebacterium, Arthrobacter and Staphylococcus spp.\n are", " and Proteus vulgaris\n were found on one of the farmhouse cheeses. The surface yeast \nmicrobiota consisted primarily of one dominating species for each \ncheese. For the  [CLS] farmhouse cheeses, the dominant yeast species were Yarrowia lipolytica [CLS] , Geotrichum spp. and Debaryomyces hansenii, respectively, and for the cheese from the industrial dairy, D. hansenii was the dominant yeast species. Additionally, denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) analysis revealed", " the three farmhouse cheeses consisted of two to four \ngroups, whereas the cheese produced at the industrial dairy (dairy D) \nconsisted of only one single group. The  [CLS] cheese from dairy A was equally \ndominated by Yarrowia lipolytica [CLS]  and Scopulariopsis brevicaulis. The yeast microbiota on cheese from dairy B was primarily dominated by Geotrichum spp., however, Kluyveromyces marxianus and Debaryomyces hansenii were additionally found in minor amounts.", " to be the dominating yeast species on the cheeses from dairies C and D, whereas Geotrichum spp. was found to dominate on the cheese from dairy B. On the  [CLS] cheese from dairy A, Yarrowia lipolytica [CLS]  was the dominating yeast species. Y. lipolytica\n is a naturally developing yeast species on cheese surfaces, and has in \nsome cases been shown to rapidly outnumber other"]]
["bb_train_216", [" [CLS] acid-tolerant yeasts (Debaryomyces hansenii, Geotrichum candidum, Kluyveromyces sp. and Yarrowia lipolytica [CLS] ) dominate the surface and metabolize lactate ( Corsetti et al., 2001, Mounier et al., 2005 and Larpin et al., 2006).\n This utilization leads to the deacidification of the"]]
["bb_train_217", [" utilization leads to the deacidification of the cheese surface, \nallowing the development of less acid-tolerant, aerobic or facultative \nanaerobic, catalase-positive, halo-tolerant Gram-positive bacteria. \nBacteria such as  [CLS] Brevibacterium aurantiacum, Corynebacterium, Arthrobacter and Staphylococcus spp.\n are the most common species found on the cheese [CLS]  surface and play a role\n during the ripening step in terms of aroma compounds and color \ndevelopment of smear surface-ripened cheese ( Corsetti et al., 2001, Brennan", " utilization leads to the deacidification of the cheese surface, \nallowing the development of less acid-tolerant, aerobic or facultative \nanaerobic, catalase-positive, halo-tolerant Gram-positive bacteria. \nBacteria such as  [CLS] Brevibacterium aurantiacum, Corynebacterium, Arthrobacter and Staphylococcus spp.\n are the most common species found on the cheese surface [CLS]  and play a role\n during the ripening step in terms of aroma compounds and color \ndevelopment of smear surface-ripened cheese ( Corsetti et al., 2001, Brennan et", " utilization leads to the deacidification of the cheese surface, \nallowing the development of less acid-tolerant, aerobic or facultative \nanaerobic, catalase-positive, halo-tolerant Gram-positive bacteria. \nBacteria such as  [CLS] Brevibacterium aurantiacum, Corynebacterium, Arthrobacter and Staphylococcus spp.\n are the most common species found on the cheese surface and play a role\n during the ripening step in terms of aroma compounds and color \ndevelopment of smear surface-ripened cheese [CLS]  ( Corsetti et al., 2001, Brennan et al., 2002, Rea et al., 2007, Goerges et al., 2008 and Mounier et al., 2005).\n"]]
["bb_train_218", [" to the deacidification of the cheese surface, \nallowing the development of less acid-tolerant, aerobic or facultative \nanaerobic, catalase-positive, halo-tolerant Gram-positive bacteria. \nBacteria such as Brevibacterium aurantiacum,  [CLS] Corynebacterium, Arthrobacter and Staphylococcus spp.\n are the most common species found on the cheese surface [CLS]  and play a role\n during the ripening step in terms of aroma compounds and color \ndevelopment of smear surface-ripened cheese ( Corsetti et al., 2001, Brennan et", " to the deacidification of the cheese surface, \nallowing the development of less acid-tolerant, aerobic or facultative \nanaerobic, catalase-positive, halo-tolerant Gram-positive bacteria. \nBacteria such as Brevibacterium aurantiacum,  [CLS] Corynebacterium, Arthrobacter and Staphylococcus spp.\n are the most common species found on the cheese surface and play a role\n during the ripening step in terms of aroma compounds and color \ndevelopment of smear surface-ripened cheese [CLS]  ( Corsetti et al., 2001, Brennan et al., 2002, Rea et al., 2007, Goerges et al., 2008 and Mounier et al., 2005).\n", " to the deacidification of the cheese surface, \nallowing the development of less acid-tolerant, aerobic or facultative \nanaerobic, catalase-positive, halo-tolerant Gram-positive bacteria. \nBacteria such as Brevibacterium aurantiacum,  [CLS] Corynebacterium, Arthrobacter and Staphylococcus spp.\n are the most common species found on the cheese [CLS]  surface and play a role\n during the ripening step in terms of aroma compounds and color \ndevelopment of smear surface-ripened cheese ( Corsetti et al., 2001, Brennan"]]
["bb_train_219", [" the deacidification of the cheese surface, \nallowing the development of less acid-tolerant, aerobic or facultative \nanaerobic, catalase-positive, halo-tolerant Gram-positive bacteria. \nBacteria such as Brevibacterium aurantiacum, Corynebacterium,  [CLS] Arthrobacter and Staphylococcus spp.\n are the most common species found on the cheese surface [CLS]  and play a role\n during the ripening step in terms of aroma compounds and color \ndevelopment of smear surface-ripened cheese ( Corsetti et al., 2001, Brennan et", " the deacidification of the cheese surface, \nallowing the development of less acid-tolerant, aerobic or facultative \nanaerobic, catalase-positive, halo-tolerant Gram-positive bacteria. \nBacteria such as Brevibacterium aurantiacum, Corynebacterium,  [CLS] Arthrobacter and Staphylococcus spp.\n are the most common species found on the cheese [CLS]  surface and play a role\n during the ripening step in terms of aroma compounds and color \ndevelopment of smear surface-ripened cheese ( Corsetti et al., 2001, Brennan", " the deacidification of the cheese surface, \nallowing the development of less acid-tolerant, aerobic or facultative \nanaerobic, catalase-positive, halo-tolerant Gram-positive bacteria. \nBacteria such as Brevibacterium aurantiacum, Corynebacterium,  [CLS] Arthrobacter and Staphylococcus spp.\n are the most common species found on the cheese surface and play a role\n during the ripening step in terms of aroma compounds and color \ndevelopment of smear surface-ripened cheese [CLS]  ( Corsetti et al., 2001, Brennan et al., 2002, Rea et al., 2007, Goerges et al., 2008 and Mounier et al., 2005).\n", " [CLS] Arthrobacter strains isolated from cheese [CLS]  to that of 15 environmental isolates. Most bacteria of the genus Arthrobacter are isolated from environments such as soil, where they are considered to be ubiquitous [41].\n Interestingly,", " [CLS] Arthrobacter are isolated from environments such as soil [CLS] , where they are considered to be ubiquitous [41].\n Interestingly, the four cheese strains share several properties that \nmay be linked to adaptation to the cheese habitat, such"]]
["bb_train_220", [" of the cheese surface, \nallowing the development of less acid-tolerant, aerobic or facultative \nanaerobic, catalase-positive, halo-tolerant Gram-positive bacteria. \nBacteria such as Brevibacterium aurantiacum, Corynebacterium, Arthrobacter and  [CLS] Staphylococcus spp.\n are the most common species found on the cheese [CLS]  surface and play a role\n during the ripening step in terms of aroma compounds and color \ndevelopment of smear surface-ripened cheese ( Corsetti et al., 2001, Brennan", " of the cheese surface, \nallowing the development of less acid-tolerant, aerobic or facultative \nanaerobic, catalase-positive, halo-tolerant Gram-positive bacteria. \nBacteria such as Brevibacterium aurantiacum, Corynebacterium, Arthrobacter and  [CLS] Staphylococcus spp.\n are the most common species found on the cheese surface and play a role\n during the ripening step in terms of aroma compounds and color \ndevelopment of smear surface-ripened cheese [CLS]  ( Corsetti et al., 2001, Brennan et al., 2002, Rea et al., 2007, Goerges et al., 2008 and Mounier et al., 2005).\n", " of the cheese surface, \nallowing the development of less acid-tolerant, aerobic or facultative \nanaerobic, catalase-positive, halo-tolerant Gram-positive bacteria. \nBacteria such as Brevibacterium aurantiacum, Corynebacterium, Arthrobacter and  [CLS] Staphylococcus spp.\n are the most common species found on the cheese surface [CLS]  and play a role\n during the ripening step in terms of aroma compounds and color \ndevelopment of smear surface-ripened cheese ( Corsetti et al., 2001, Brennan et"]]
["bb_train_221", [" [CLS] smear cheese surfaces ( Maoz et al., 2003, Mounier et al., 2005, Mounier et al., 2009 and Larpin-Laborde et al., 2011). The most common genera are Psychrobacter [CLS]  that includes psychrotrophic species, Halomonas, frequently isolated from marine environments, and Hafnia, of which some strains are commercialized and inoculated during cheese-making ( Mounier et al., 2005, Mounier et", " [CLS] bacterial microbiota of some smear cheese surfaces ( Maoz et al., 2003, Mounier et al., 2005, Mounier et al., 2009 and Larpin-Laborde et al., 2011). The most common genera are Psychrobacter [CLS]  that includes psychrotrophic species, Halomonas, frequently isolated from marine environments, and Hafnia, of which some strains are commercialized and inoculated during cheese-making ( Mounier et al., 2005, Mounier et", " [CLS] smear cheese surfaces ( Maoz et al., 2003, Mounier et al., 2005, Mounier et al., 2009 and Larpin-Laborde et al., 2011). The most common genera are Psychrobacter [CLS]  that includes psychrotrophic species, Halomonas, frequently isolated from marine environments, and Hafnia, of which some strains are commercialized and inoculated during cheese-making ( Mounier et al., 2005, Mounier et", " of the blue-veined cheese G was dominated by a strain close to Arthrobacter bergerei Ca106 (18.6% of the reads, 99.2% perfect match reads). Like for the two other cheeses,  [CLS] Psychrobacter\n species seem to be present in this cheese [CLS] . Cheese G was probably \nmanufactured with a thermophilic lactic starter culture, since Streptococcus thermophilus and Lactobacillus delbrueckii species were the dominant lactic acid bacteria, in contrast to the", " surface of the blue-veined cheese G was dominated by a strain close to Arthrobacter bergerei Ca106 (18.6% of the reads, 99.2% perfect match reads). Like for the two other  [CLS] cheeses, Psychrobacter [CLS] \n species seem to be present in this cheese. Cheese G was probably \nmanufactured with a thermophilic lactic starter culture, since Streptococcus thermophilus and Lactobacillus delbrueckii species were", " [CLS] Psychrobacter are Gram-negative bacteria which had been previously detected in such cheeses [CLS] [1, 2, 9, 12, 13, 28, 49\u201353], and also in a recent large amplicon sequencing study of the microbial composition of 137 different cheese rinds [33].\n", " [CLS] Psychrobacter are Gram-negative bacteria which had been previously detected in such cheeses[1, 2, 9, 12, 13, 28, 49\u201353], and also in a recent large amplicon sequencing study of the microbial composition of 137 different cheese rinds [CLS]  [33].\n"]]
["bb_train_222", [" [CLS] smear cheese surfaces ( Maoz et al., 2003, Mounier et al., 2005, Mounier et al., 2009 and Larpin-Laborde et al., 2011). The most common genera are Psychrobacter that includes psychrotrophic species, Halomonas [CLS] , frequently isolated from marine environments, and Hafnia, of which some strains are commercialized and inoculated during cheese-making ( Mounier et al., 2005, Mounier et al., 2009 and Rea et", " [CLS] smear cheese surfaces ( Maoz et al., 2003, Mounier et al., 2005, Mounier et al., 2009 and Larpin-Laborde et al., 2011). The most common genera are Psychrobacter that includes psychrotrophic species, Halomonas [CLS] , frequently isolated from marine environments, and Hafnia, of which some strains are commercialized and inoculated during cheese-making ( Mounier et al., 2005, Mounier et al., 2009 and Rea et", " surfaces ( Maoz et al., 2003, Mounier et al., 2005, Mounier et al., 2009 and Larpin-Laborde et al., 2011). The most common genera are Psychrobacter that includes psychrotrophic species,  [CLS] Halomonas, frequently isolated from marine environments [CLS] , and Hafnia, of which some strains are commercialized and inoculated during cheese-making ( Mounier et al., 2005, Mounier et al., 2009 and Rea et al., 2007).\n", " [CLS] bacterial microbiota of some smear cheese surfaces ( Maoz et al., 2003, Mounier et al., 2005, Mounier et al., 2009 and Larpin-Laborde et al., 2011). The most common genera are Psychrobacter that includes psychrotrophic species, Halomonas [CLS] , frequently isolated from marine environments, and Hafnia, of which some strains are commercialized and inoculated during cheese-making ( Mounier et al., 2005, Mounier et al., 2009 and Rea et", " [CLS] Halomonas strains present in the cheese [CLS]  sample are almost \nidentical to the reference strain. However, even though the reference \nstrain 1 M45 has also been isolated from a smear-ripened cheese of \nthe", " [CLS] Halomonas, Vibrio, Marinilactibacillus and Psychrobacter are Gram-negative bacteria which had been previously detected in such cheeses[1, 2, 9, 12, 13, 28, 49\u201353], and also in a recent large amplicon sequencing study of the microbial composition of 137 different cheese rinds [CLS]  [33].\n", " [CLS] Halomonas, Vibrio, Marinilactibacillus and Psychrobacter are Gram-negative bacteria which had been previously detected in such cheeses [CLS] [1, 2, 9, 12, 13, 28, 49\u201353], and also in a recent large amplicon sequencing study of the microbial composition of 137 different cheese rinds [33].\n"]]
["bb_train_223", [" [CLS] smear cheese surfaces ( Maoz et al., 2003, Mounier et al., 2005, Mounier et al., 2009 and Larpin-Laborde et al., 2011). The most common genera are Psychrobacter that includes psychrotrophic species, Halomonas, frequently isolated from marine environments, and Hafnia [CLS] , of which some strains are commercialized and inoculated during cheese-making ( Mounier et al., 2005, Mounier et al., 2009 and Rea et al., 2007).\n", " [CLS] bacterial microbiota of some smear cheese surfaces ( Maoz et al., 2003, Mounier et al., 2005, Mounier et al., 2009 and Larpin-Laborde et al., 2011). The most common genera are Psychrobacter that includes psychrotrophic species, Halomonas, frequently isolated from marine environments, and Hafnia [CLS] , of which some strains are commercialized and inoculated during cheese-making ( Mounier et al., 2005, Mounier et al., 2009 and Rea et al., 2007).\n", " et al., 2005, Mounier et al., 2009 and Larpin-Laborde et al., 2011). The most common genera are Psychrobacter that includes psychrotrophic species, Halomonas, frequently isolated from marine environments, and  [CLS] Hafnia, of which some strains are commercialized and inoculated during cheese [CLS] -making ( Mounier et al., 2005, Mounier et al., 2009 and Rea et al., 2007).\n", " [CLS] smear cheese surfaces ( Maoz et al., 2003, Mounier et al., 2005, Mounier et al., 2009 and Larpin-Laborde et al., 2011). The most common genera are Psychrobacter that includes psychrotrophic species, Halomonas, frequently isolated from marine environments, and Hafnia [CLS] , of which some strains are commercialized and inoculated during cheese-making ( Mounier et al., 2005, Mounier et al., 2009 and Rea et al., 2007).\n", " [CLS] Hafnia strains slightly reduced counts of Enterococcus faecalis (~\u2212 0.5 log from day 1) and promoted Lactobacillus plantarum\n growth (+ 0.2 to 0.5 log from day 8) in cheese [CLS] . They produced \nsmall amounts of putrescine (~ 1.3 mmol/kg) and cadaverine \n(~ 0.9 mmol/kg) in cheese after 28 days, and did not \naffect levels of volatile"]]
["bb_train_224", [" amino acids in cheese and accelerating ripening (Chaves-Lopez et al., 2006, Morales et al., 2003 and Corsetti et al., 1998). Morales et al. (2005) showed that some species of  [CLS] Pseudomonas\n spp. of dairy origin can produce a large variety of volatile compounds \nsuch as alcohols or esters and, consequently, may have a negative effect\n on the organoleptic characteristics of cheeses [CLS] . Other bacteria \nbelonging of the Enterobacteriaceae family such as Hafnia alvei are able to produce flavor compounds ( Morales et al., 2004) but may also lead to stronger", " amino acids in cheese and accelerating ripening (Chaves-Lopez et al., 2006, Morales et al., 2003 and Corsetti et al., 1998). Morales et al. (2005) showed that some species of  [CLS] Pseudomonas\n spp. of dairy [CLS]  origin can produce a large variety of volatile compounds \nsuch as alcohols or esters and, consequently, may have a negative effect\n on the organoleptic characteristics of cheeses."]]
["bb_train_225", [" flavor compounds ( Morales et al., 2004) but may also lead to stronger proteolysis, thus modifying the final texture of the cheese (Morales et al., 2003). A strain of  [CLS] Psychrobacter sp., isolated from cheese, was inoculated with a yeast at a high concentration in model cheese [CLS]  ( Deetae et al., 2009a).\n This strain produced a large quantity of volatile aroma compounds and, \nmore particularly, sulfur compounds.\n", " flavor compounds ( Morales et al., 2004) but may also lead to stronger proteolysis, thus modifying the final texture of the cheese (Morales et al., 2003). A strain of  [CLS] Psychrobacter sp., isolated from cheese [CLS] , was inoculated with a yeast at a high concentration in model cheese ( Deetae et al., 2009a).\n This strain produced a large quantity of volatile aroma compounds and,", " [CLS] Psychrobacter sp. and Hafnia sp. are frequently detected in milk [CLS]  or smear cheeses ( Mayr et al., 2004, Hantsis-Zacharov and Halpern, 2007, Mounier et al., 2009, Abriouel et al., 2008 and Fontana et al., 2010).\n", " [CLS] Psychrobacter sp. and Hafnia sp. are frequently detected in milk or smear cheeses [CLS]  ( Mayr et al., 2004, Hantsis-Zacharov and Halpern, 2007, Mounier et al., 2009, Abriouel et al., 2008 and Fontana et al., 2010).\n", " and Bosset, 2002). The production of 3-methylbutanal and 3-methylbutanol has already been reported in P. phenylpyruvica in a cured meat model system ( Moller et al., 1998), and in  [CLS] Psychrobacter sp. in a model cheese [CLS]  ( Deetae et al., 2009a). When P. celer\n was present in cheeses, 2-pentanone, 2-heptanone and 2-nonanone were \nproduced in greater quantities than in the control cheeses.\n"]]
["bb_train_226", [" [CLS] Proteus vulgaris\n 1 M10, produced high concentrations of flavor compounds, \nparticularly branched-chain alcohols, during the ripening process in a \nmodel cheese [CLS] . However, this strain has also been shown to exhibit some \npotential risks for human health (Coton et al., 2012) even if no sanitary problems have been linked to"]]
["bb_train_227", [" no sanitary problems have been linked to the presence of this species as of this time.The objective of this study was to determine the capacity of colonization of two  [CLS] Gram-negative bacteria, Psychrobacter celer and H. alvei [CLS] ,\n and their impact on the growth of other microbial populations and on \naroma compound production at the surface of experimental smear soft \ncheese. These bacteria were", " DMS should significantly contribute to \nflavor because of their very low perception thresholds and their garlic \nor very ripe cheese notes ( Sabl\u00e9 and Cottenceau, 1999). The  [CLS] high capacity of H. alvei\n to produce VSC [CLS]  is probably the result of its high capacity to convert \nmethionine or cysteine into aroma compounds with a transamination or \ndeamination activity. It was previously shown that", " contribute to \nflavor because of their very low perception thresholds and their garlic \nor very ripe cheese notes ( Sabl\u00e9 and Cottenceau, 1999). The high capacity of  [CLS] H. alvei\n to produce VSC is probably the result of its high capacity to convert \nmethionine or cysteine into aroma compounds [CLS]  with a transamination or \ndeamination activity. It was previously shown that VSC (methanethiol, \nDMDS, DMTS) were produced by H. alvei but grown on beef models ( Dainty"]]
["bb_train_228", [" [CLS] S3 + and its protease-negative variant S3-, assigned to Lactococcus lactis sp. lactis, was used for cheese [CLS] -making. The 11 microorganisms that composed the model community included seven bacteria \u2014 Lactobacillus casei FH1, Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus"]]
["bb_train_229", [" [CLS] S3-, assigned to Lactococcus lactis sp. lactis, was used for cheese [CLS] -making. The 11 microorganisms that composed the model community included seven bacteria \u2014 Lactobacillus casei FH1, Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus"]]
["bb_train_230", [" [CLS] protease-negative variant S3-, assigned to Lactococcus lactis sp. lactis [CLS] , was used for cheese-making. The 11 microorganisms that composed the model community included seven bacteria \u2014 Lactobacillus casei FH1, Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128, C."]]
["bb_train_231", [" S3 + and its protease-negative variant S3-, assigned to Lactococcus lactis sp. lactis, was used for cheese-making. The 11 microorganisms that composed the model community included seven bacteria \u2014  [CLS] Lactobacillus casei FH1, Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68, G. candidum GC129, Y. lipolytica CI35 and K. lactis\n KL65. This composition is representative of the diversity of smear soft\n cheese [CLS] . The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \nGram-negative bacteria studied, P. celer 91 and H. alvei", " [CLS] model community included seven bacteria \u2014 Lactobacillus casei FH1 [CLS] , Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68, G. candidum"]]
["bb_train_232", [" [CLS] model community included seven bacteria \u2014 Lactobacillus casei FH1, Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117 [CLS] , Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68, G. candidum GC129, Y. lipolytica", " its protease-negative variant S3-, assigned to Lactococcus lactis sp. lactis, was used for cheese-making. The 11 microorganisms that composed the model community included seven bacteria \u2014 Lactobacillus casei FH1,  [CLS] Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68, G. candidum GC129, Y. lipolytica CI35 and K. lactis\n KL65. This composition is representative of the diversity of smear soft\n cheese [CLS] . The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \nGram-negative bacteria studied, P. celer 91 and H. alvei", " such as soil, where they are considered to be ubiquitous [41].\n Interestingly, the four cheese strains share several properties that \nmay be linked to adaptation to the  [CLS] cheese habitat, such as a cluster of \nfive genes involved in the catabolism of D-galactonate, as already \ndescribed in Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117 [CLS]  [20].\n"]]
["bb_train_233", [" [CLS] model community included seven bacteria \u2014 Lactobacillus casei FH1, Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120 [CLS] , C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68, G. candidum GC129, Y. lipolytica CI35 and K.", " S3-, assigned to Lactococcus lactis sp. lactis, was used for cheese-making. The 11 microorganisms that composed the model community included seven bacteria \u2014 Lactobacillus casei FH1, Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117,  [CLS] Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68, G. candidum GC129, Y. lipolytica CI35 and K. lactis\n KL65. This composition is representative of the diversity of smear soft\n cheese. The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster [CLS]  except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \nGram-negative bacteria studied, P. celer 91 and H. alvei\n 2 920, isolated from Livarot and", " S3-, assigned to Lactococcus lactis sp. lactis, was used for cheese-making. The 11 microorganisms that composed the model community included seven bacteria \u2014 Lactobacillus casei FH1, Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117,  [CLS] Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68, G. candidum GC129, Y. lipolytica CI35 and K. lactis\n KL65. This composition is representative of the diversity of smear soft\n cheese [CLS] . The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \nGram-negative bacteria studied, P. celer 91 and H. alvei"]]
["bb_train_234", [" [CLS] model community included seven bacteria \u2014 Lactobacillus casei FH1, Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128 [CLS] , C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68, G. candidum GC129, Y. lipolytica CI35 and K. lactis\n KL65.", " Lactococcus lactis sp. lactis, was used for cheese-making. The 11 microorganisms that composed the model community included seven bacteria \u2014 Lactobacillus casei FH1, Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120,  [CLS] C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68, G. candidum GC129, Y. lipolytica CI35 and K. lactis\n KL65. This composition is representative of the diversity of smear soft\n cheese [CLS] . The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \nGram-negative bacteria studied, P. celer 91 and H. alvei", " Lactococcus lactis sp. lactis, was used for cheese-making. The 11 microorganisms that composed the model community included seven bacteria \u2014 Lactobacillus casei FH1, Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120,  [CLS] C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68, G. candidum GC129, Y. lipolytica CI35 and K. lactis\n KL65. This composition is representative of the diversity of smear soft\n cheese. The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster [CLS]  except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \nGram-negative bacteria studied, P. celer 91 and H. alvei\n 2 920, isolated from Livarot and"]]
["bb_train_235", [" [CLS] model community included seven bacteria \u2014 Lactobacillus casei FH1, Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129 [CLS] , Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68, G. candidum GC129, Y. lipolytica CI35 and K. lactis\n KL65. This composition is", " lactis, was used for cheese-making. The 11 microorganisms that composed the model community included seven bacteria \u2014 Lactobacillus casei FH1, Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128,  [CLS] C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68, G. candidum GC129, Y. lipolytica CI35 and K. lactis\n KL65. This composition is representative of the diversity of smear soft\n cheese. The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster [CLS]  except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \nGram-negative bacteria studied, P. celer 91 and H. alvei\n 2 920, isolated from Livarot and", " lactis, was used for cheese-making. The 11 microorganisms that composed the model community included seven bacteria \u2014 Lactobacillus casei FH1, Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128,  [CLS] C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68, G. candidum GC129, Y. lipolytica CI35 and K. lactis\n KL65. This composition is representative of the diversity of smear soft\n cheese [CLS] . The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \nGram-negative bacteria studied, P. celer 91 and H. alvei"]]
["bb_train_236", [" for cheese-making. The 11 microorganisms that composed the model community included seven bacteria \u2014 Lactobacillus casei FH1, Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129,  [CLS] Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68, G. candidum GC129, Y. lipolytica CI35 and K. lactis\n KL65. This composition is representative of the diversity of smear soft\n cheese. The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster [CLS]  except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \nGram-negative bacteria studied, P. celer 91 and H. alvei\n 2 920, isolated from Livarot and", " [CLS] model community included seven bacteria \u2014 Lactobacillus casei FH1, Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 [CLS]  and S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68, G. candidum GC129, Y. lipolytica CI35 and K. lactis\n KL65. This composition is representative of the", " for cheese-making. The 11 microorganisms that composed the model community included seven bacteria \u2014 Lactobacillus casei FH1, Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129,  [CLS] Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68, G. candidum GC129, Y. lipolytica CI35 and K. lactis\n KL65. This composition is representative of the diversity of smear soft\n cheese [CLS] . The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \nGram-negative bacteria studied, P. celer 91 and H. alvei"]]
["bb_train_237", [" [CLS] model community included seven bacteria \u2014 Lactobacillus casei FH1, Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and S. equorum Mu2 [CLS]  \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68, G. candidum GC129, Y. lipolytica CI35 and K. lactis\n KL65. This composition is representative of the diversity of smear soft", " microorganisms that composed the model community included seven bacteria \u2014 Lactobacillus casei FH1, Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and  [CLS] S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68, G. candidum GC129, Y. lipolytica CI35 and K. lactis\n KL65. This composition is representative of the diversity of smear soft\n cheese [CLS] . The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \nGram-negative bacteria studied, P. celer 91 and H. alvei", " microorganisms that composed the model community included seven bacteria \u2014 Lactobacillus casei FH1, Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and  [CLS] S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68, G. candidum GC129, Y. lipolytica CI35 and K. lactis\n KL65. This composition is representative of the diversity of smear soft\n cheese. The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster [CLS]  except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \nGram-negative bacteria studied, P. celer 91 and H. alvei\n 2 920, isolated from Livarot and"]]
["bb_train_238", [" [CLS] model community included seven bacteria \u2014 Lactobacillus casei FH1, Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68 [CLS] , G. candidum GC129, Y. lipolytica CI35 and K. lactis\n KL65. This composition is representative of the diversity of smear soft\n cheese. The microorganisms were originally isolated from", " bacteria \u2014 Lactobacillus casei FH1, Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014  [CLS] D. hansenii DH68, G. candidum GC129, Y. lipolytica CI35 and K. lactis\n KL65. This composition is representative of the diversity of smear soft\n cheese. The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster [CLS]  except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \nGram-negative bacteria studied, P. celer 91 and H. alvei\n 2 920, isolated from Livarot and", " bacteria \u2014 Lactobacillus casei FH1, Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014  [CLS] D. hansenii DH68, G. candidum GC129, Y. lipolytica CI35 and K. lactis\n KL65. This composition is representative of the diversity of smear soft\n cheese [CLS] . The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \nGram-negative bacteria studied, P. celer 91 and H. alvei"]]
["bb_train_239", [" casei FH1, Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68,  [CLS] G. candidum GC129, Y. lipolytica CI35 and K. lactis\n KL65. This composition is representative of the diversity of smear soft\n cheese [CLS] . The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \nGram-negative bacteria studied, P. celer 91 and H. alvei", " [CLS] model community included seven bacteria \u2014 Lactobacillus casei FH1, Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68, G. candidum GC129 [CLS] , Y. lipolytica CI35 and K. lactis\n KL65. This composition is representative of the diversity of smear soft\n cheese. The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster except\n", " casei FH1, Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68,  [CLS] G. candidum GC129, Y. lipolytica CI35 and K. lactis\n KL65. This composition is representative of the diversity of smear soft\n cheese. The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster [CLS]  except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \nGram-negative bacteria studied, P. celer 91 and H. alvei\n 2 920, isolated from Livarot and"]]
["bb_train_240", [" arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68, G. candidum GC129,  [CLS] Y. lipolytica CI35 and K. lactis\n KL65. This composition is representative of the diversity of smear soft\n cheese. The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster [CLS]  except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \nGram-negative bacteria studied, P. celer 91 and H. alvei\n 2 920, isolated from Livarot and", " arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68, G. candidum GC129,  [CLS] Y. lipolytica CI35 and K. lactis\n KL65. This composition is representative of the diversity of smear soft\n cheese [CLS] . The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \nGram-negative bacteria studied, P. celer 91 and H. alvei", " [CLS] model community included seven bacteria \u2014 Lactobacillus casei FH1, Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68, G. candidum GC129, Y. lipolytica CI35 [CLS]  and K. lactis\n KL65. This composition is representative of the diversity of smear soft\n cheese. The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster except\n for Re117 (Reblochon),"]]
["bb_train_241", [" Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68, G. candidum GC129, Y. lipolytica CI35 and  [CLS] K. lactis\n KL65. This composition is representative of the diversity of smear soft\n cheese [CLS] . The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \nGram-negative bacteria studied, P. celer 91 and H. alvei", " [CLS] model community included seven bacteria \u2014 Lactobacillus casei FH1, Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117, Corynebacterium casei Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68, G. candidum GC129, Y. lipolytica CI35 and K. lactis\n KL65 [CLS] . This composition is representative of the diversity of smear soft\n cheese. The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St.", " Mu120, C. flavescens Mu128, C. variabile Mu129, Staphylococcus xylosus Com1 and S. equorum Mu2 \u2014 and four yeasts \u2014 D. hansenii DH68, G. candidum GC129, Y. lipolytica CI35 and  [CLS] K. lactis\n KL65. This composition is representative of the diversity of smear soft\n cheese. The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster [CLS]  except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \nGram-negative bacteria studied, P. celer 91 and H. alvei\n 2 920, isolated from Livarot and"]]
["bb_train_242", [" lipolytica CI35 and K. lactis\n KL65. This composition is representative of the diversity of smear soft\n cheese. The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster except\n for  [CLS] Re117 (Reblochon [CLS] ), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \nGram-negative bacteria studied, P. celer 91 and H. alvei\n 2 920, isolated from Livarot and Munster cheese, respectively, were "]]
["bb_train_243", ["\n KL65. This composition is representative of the diversity of smear soft\n cheese. The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and  [CLS] FH1 (St. Nectaire [CLS] ). The \nGram-negative bacteria studied, P. celer 91 and H. alvei\n 2 920, isolated from Livarot and Munster cheese, respectively, were \nchosen from a large cheese bacteria"]]
["bb_train_244", [" diversity of smear soft\n cheese. The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \nGram-negative bacteria studied,  [CLS] P. celer 91 and H. alvei\n 2 920, isolated from Livarot and Munster cheese, respectively, were \nchosen from a large cheese bacteria collection for their low level of \nsanitary risk (sensitivity to 24 antibiotics, no production of biogenic \namines in synthetic media [CLS]  and no growth under anaerobic condition and at\n 37 \u00b0C) (Coton et al., 2012).\n", " diversity of smear soft\n cheese. The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \nGram-negative bacteria studied,  [CLS] P. celer 91 and H. alvei\n 2 920, isolated from Livarot [CLS]  and Munster cheese, respectively, were \nchosen from a large cheese bacteria collection for their low level of \nsanitary risk (sensitivity to 24 antibiotics, no production of biogenic"]]
["bb_train_245", [" representative of the diversity of smear soft\n cheese. The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \n [CLS] Gram-negative bacteria studied, P. celer 91 [CLS]  and H. alvei\n 2 920, isolated from Livarot and Munster cheese, respectively, were \nchosen from a large cheese bacteria collection for their low level of \nsanitary", " diversity of smear soft\n cheese. The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \nGram-negative bacteria studied,  [CLS] P. celer 91 and H. alvei\n 2 920, isolated from Livarot and Munster cheese, respectively, were \nchosen from a large cheese bacteria collection for their low level of \nsanitary risk (sensitivity to 24 antibiotics [CLS] , no production of biogenic \namines in synthetic media and no growth under anaerobic condition and at\n 37 \u00b0C) (Coton et al., 2012).\n"]]
["bb_train_246", ["\n cheese. The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \nGram-negative bacteria studied, P. celer 91 and  [CLS] H. alvei\n 2 920, isolated from Livarot and Munster cheese, respectively, were \nchosen from a large cheese bacteria collection for their low level of \nsanitary risk (sensitivity to 24 antibiotics, no production of biogenic \namines in synthetic media [CLS]  and no growth under anaerobic condition and at\n 37 \u00b0C) (Coton et al., 2012).\n", "\n cheese. The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \nGram-negative bacteria studied, P. celer 91 and  [CLS] H. alvei\n 2 920, isolated from Livarot and Munster cheese [CLS] , respectively, were \nchosen from a large cheese bacteria collection for their low level of \nsanitary risk (sensitivity to 24 antibiotics, no production of biogenic \namines in"]]
["bb_train_247", ["\n cheese. The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \nGram-negative bacteria studied, P. celer 91 and  [CLS] H. alvei\n 2 920, isolated from Livarot and Munster cheese, respectively, were \nchosen from a large cheese bacteria collection for their low level of \nsanitary risk (sensitivity to 24 antibiotics [CLS] , no production of biogenic \namines in synthetic media and no growth under anaerobic condition and at\n 37 \u00b0C) (Coton et al., 2012).\n", " representative of the diversity of smear soft\n cheese. The microorganisms were originally isolated from Munster except\n for Re117 (Reblochon), Com1 (unknown) and FH1 (St. Nectaire). The \n [CLS] Gram-negative bacteria studied, P. celer 91 and H. alvei\n 2 920 [CLS] , isolated from Livarot and Munster cheese, respectively, were \nchosen from a large cheese bacteria collection for their low level of \nsanitary risk (sensitivity to 24 antibiotics, no"]]
["bb_train_248", [" the yeasts studied (data not shown). All yeast communities, \nwith or without Gram-negative bacteria, reached viable cell numbers \nabove 7.9\u20138.0 log10 cfu/g after 5 days of ripening.  [CLS] D. hansenii followed by G. candidum dominated the cheese [CLS]  surface on day 5 with 7.6 log10 cfu/g and 7.1 log10 cfu/g, respectively. After day 5, G. candidum levels remained close to 7.8 log10 cfu/g while the D. hansenii", " the yeasts studied (data not shown). All yeast communities, \nwith or without Gram-negative bacteria, reached viable cell numbers \nabove 7.9\u20138.0 log10 cfu/g after 5 days of ripening.  [CLS] D. hansenii followed by G. candidum dominated the cheese surface [CLS]  on day 5 with 7.6 log10 cfu/g and 7.1 log10 cfu/g, respectively. After day 5, G. candidum levels remained close to 7.8 log10 cfu/g while the D. hansenii population", " communities, \nwith or without Gram-negative bacteria, reached viable cell numbers \nabove 7.9\u20138.0 log10 cfu/g after 5 days of ripening. D. hansenii followed by G. candidum dominated the  [CLS] cheese surface on day 5 with 7.6 log10 cfu/g and 7.1 log10 cfu/g, respectively. After day 5, G. candidum levels remained close to 7.8 log10 cfu/g while the D. hansenii [CLS]  population decreased by 1.0 to 1.5 log10 cfu/g between day 15 and day 35. Y. lipolytica levels slightly increased after day 5 and reached a maximum after 35 days", " communities, \nwith or without Gram-negative bacteria, reached viable cell numbers \nabove 7.9\u20138.0 log10 cfu/g after 5 days of ripening. D. hansenii followed by G. candidum dominated the  [CLS] cheese surface on day 5 with 7.6 log10 cfu/g and 7.1 log10 cfu/g, respectively. After day 5, G. candidum levels remained close to 7.8 log10 cfu/g while the D. hansenii [CLS]  population decreased by 1.0 to 1.5 log10 cfu/g between day 15 and day 35. Y. lipolytica levels slightly increased after day 5 and reached a maximum after 35 days", " [CLS] D. hansenii, G. candidum, Y. lipolytica and A. arilaitensis\n were dominant on the cheese surface at day 35 of ripening. These yeasts\n were also the dominant species in Munster and Livarot cheeses [CLS]  ( Larpin et al., 2006), and it was previously shown that two French red-smear soft cheeses were largely dominated by A. arilaitensis ( Feurer et al., 2004).\n", " [CLS] D. hansenii, G. candidum, Y. lipolytica and A. arilaitensis\n were dominant on the cheese surface at day 35 of ripening. These yeasts\n were also the dominant species in Munster and Livarot cheeses [CLS]  ( Larpin et al., 2006), and it was previously shown that two French red-smear soft cheeses were largely dominated by A. arilaitensis ( Feurer et al., 2004).\n", " [CLS] D. hansenii, G. candidum, Y. lipolytica and A. arilaitensis\n were dominant on the cheese [CLS]  surface at day 35 of ripening. These yeasts\n were also the dominant species in Munster and Livarot cheeses ( Larpin et al., 2006), and it was previously shown", " [CLS] D. hansenii, G. candidum, Y. lipolytica and A. arilaitensis\n were dominant on the cheese surface [CLS]  at day 35 of ripening. These yeasts\n were also the dominant species in Munster and Livarot cheeses ( Larpin et al., 2006), and it was previously shown that", " primarily of one dominating species for each \ncheese. For the farmhouse cheeses, the dominant yeast species were Yarrowia lipolytica, Geotrichum spp. and Debaryomyces hansenii, respectively, and for the  [CLS] cheese from the industrial dairy, D. hansenii [CLS]  was the dominant yeast species. Additionally, denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) analysis revealed that Streptococcus thermophilus was present in the farmhouse raw milk cheese analysed in this study. Furthermore,", " the initial ripening period, yeasts (primarily Debaryomyces hansenii for semi-soft cheeses and additionally Geotrichum candidum for soft cheeses) and coagulase-negative staphylococci (Staphylococcus equorum) are present [3, 21, 26]. Generally,  [CLS] D. hansenii\n and staphylococci on cheese surface are assumed to originate from the \ncheese brine [CLS] , which often is not changed or pasteurised between salting \nof different batches [2, 3, 42]. For D. hansenii, Petersen et al. [46] showed that the dominating D. hansenii", " the initial ripening period, yeasts (primarily Debaryomyces hansenii for semi-soft cheeses and additionally Geotrichum candidum for soft cheeses) and coagulase-negative staphylococci (Staphylococcus equorum) are present [3, 21, 26]. Generally,  [CLS] D. hansenii\n and staphylococci on cheese surface [CLS]  are assumed to originate from the \ncheese brine, which often is not changed or pasteurised between salting \nof different batches [2, 3, 42]. For D. hansenii, Petersen", "\ncheese brine, which often is not changed or pasteurised between salting \nof different batches [2, 3, 42]. For D. hansenii, Petersen et al. [46] showed that the dominating  [CLS] D. hansenii\n strain on cheeses of the Danish Danbo type did not originate from the \nadded ripening culture, but from the dairy housemicrobiota [CLS]  present in \nthe ripening room. D. hansenii is important during \ncheese ripening as it assimilates lactate and produces alkaline \nmetabolites such as ammonia thereby increasing pH", "\ncheese brine, which often is not changed or pasteurised between salting \nof different batches [2, 3, 42]. For D. hansenii, Petersen et al. [46] showed that the dominating  [CLS] D. hansenii\n strain on cheeses of the Danish Danbo type [CLS]  did not originate from the \nadded ripening culture, but from the dairy housemicrobiota present in \nthe ripening room. D. hansenii is important during \ncheese ripening as", "\ncheese brine, which often is not changed or pasteurised between salting \nof different batches [2, 3, 42]. For D. hansenii, Petersen et al. [46] showed that the dominating  [CLS] D. hansenii\n strain on cheeses of the Danish Danbo type did not originate from the \nadded ripening culture, but from the dairy housemicrobiota present in \nthe ripening room [CLS] . D. hansenii is important during \ncheese ripening as it assimilates lactate and produces alkaline \nmetabolites such as ammonia thereby increasing pH of the cheese surface [23, 46],", "\n strain on cheeses of the Danish Danbo type did not originate from the \nadded ripening culture, but from the dairy housemicrobiota present in \nthe ripening room.  [CLS] D. hansenii is important during \ncheese [CLS]  ripening as it assimilates lactate and produces alkaline \nmetabolites such as ammonia thereby increasing pH of the cheese surface [23, 46], which enables the growth of the less", "\n strain on cheeses of the Danish Danbo type did not originate from the \nadded ripening culture, but from the dairy housemicrobiota present in \nthe ripening room.  [CLS] D. hansenii is important during \ncheese ripening as it assimilates lactate and produces alkaline \nmetabolites such as ammonia thereby increasing pH of the cheese surface [CLS]  [23, 46], which enables the growth of the less acid tolerant bacterial microbiota, primarily Gram-positive coryneforms (Brevibacterium spp., Corynebacterium spp. and Microbacterium spp.) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria", " Scopulariopsis brevicaulis. The yeast microbiota on cheese from dairy B was primarily dominated by Geotrichum spp., however, Kluyveromyces marxianus and Debaryomyces hansenii were additionally found in minor amounts. The  [CLS] cheese from dairy C was dominated by D. hansenii [CLS]  followed by a minor group of Geothrichum spp. Finally, the cheese from dairy D was entirely dominated by D. hansenii.\n", " and Debaryomyces hansenii were additionally found in minor amounts. The cheese from dairy C was dominated by D. hansenii followed by a minor group of Geothrichum spp. Finally, the  [CLS] cheese from dairy D was entirely dominated by D. hansenii [CLS] .\n", " [CLS] D. hansenii was found to be the dominating yeast species on the cheeses from dairies C [CLS]  and D, whereas Geotrichum spp. was found to dominate on the cheese from dairy B. On the cheese from dairy A, Yarrowia lipolytica was the dominating yeast species. Y.", " [CLS] D. hansenii was found to be the dominating yeast species on the cheeses from dairies C and D [CLS] , whereas Geotrichum spp. was found to dominate on the cheese from dairy B. On the cheese from dairy A, Yarrowia lipolytica was the dominating yeast species. Y. lipolytica\n", " on the cheese from dairy B. On the cheese from dairy A, Yarrowia lipolytica was the dominating yeast species. Y. lipolytica\n is a naturally developing yeast species on  [CLS] cheese surfaces, and has in \nsome cases been shown to rapidly outnumber other yeast species including\n D. hansenii [CLS]  and Geotrichum spp. [33].\n"]]
["bb_train_249", [" not shown). All yeast communities, \nwith or without Gram-negative bacteria, reached viable cell numbers \nabove 7.9\u20138.0 log10 cfu/g after 5 days of ripening. D. hansenii followed by  [CLS] G. candidum dominated the cheese surface [CLS]  on day 5 with 7.6 log10 cfu/g and 7.1 log10 cfu/g, respectively. After day 5, G. candidum levels remained close to 7.8 log10 cfu/g while the D. hansenii population", " not shown). All yeast communities, \nwith or without Gram-negative bacteria, reached viable cell numbers \nabove 7.9\u20138.0 log10 cfu/g after 5 days of ripening. D. hansenii followed by  [CLS] G. candidum dominated the cheese [CLS]  surface on day 5 with 7.6 log10 cfu/g and 7.1 log10 cfu/g, respectively. After day 5, G. candidum levels remained close to 7.8 log10 cfu/g while the D. hansenii", " communities, \nwith or without Gram-negative bacteria, reached viable cell numbers \nabove 7.9\u20138.0 log10 cfu/g after 5 days of ripening. D. hansenii followed by G. candidum dominated the  [CLS] cheese surface on day 5 with 7.6 log10 cfu/g and 7.1 log10 cfu/g, respectively. After day 5, G. candidum [CLS]  levels remained close to 7.8 log10 cfu/g while the D. hansenii population decreased by 1.0 to 1.5 log10 cfu/g between day 15 and day 35. Y. lipolytica levels slightly", " communities, \nwith or without Gram-negative bacteria, reached viable cell numbers \nabove 7.9\u20138.0 log10 cfu/g after 5 days of ripening. D. hansenii followed by G. candidum dominated the  [CLS] cheese surface on day 5 with 7.6 log10 cfu/g and 7.1 log10 cfu/g, respectively. After day 5, G. candidum [CLS]  levels remained close to 7.8 log10 cfu/g while the D. hansenii population decreased by 1.0 to 1.5 log10 cfu/g between day 15 and day 35. Y. lipolytica levels slightly", " [CLS] G. candidum, Y. lipolytica and A. arilaitensis\n were dominant on the cheese surface at day 35 of ripening. These yeasts\n were also the dominant species in Munster and Livarot cheeses [CLS]  ( Larpin et al., 2006), and it was previously shown that two French red-smear soft cheeses were largely dominated by A. arilaitensis ( Feurer et al., 2004).\n", " [CLS] G. candidum, Y. lipolytica and A. arilaitensis\n were dominant on the cheese [CLS]  surface at day 35 of ripening. These yeasts\n were also the dominant species in Munster and Livarot cheeses ( Larpin et al., 2006), and it was previously shown", " [CLS] G. candidum, Y. lipolytica and A. arilaitensis\n were dominant on the cheese surface at day 35 of ripening. These yeasts\n were also the dominant species in Munster and Livarot cheeses [CLS]  ( Larpin et al., 2006), and it was previously shown that two French red-smear soft cheeses were largely dominated by A. arilaitensis ( Feurer et al., 2004).\n", " [CLS] G. candidum, Y. lipolytica and A. arilaitensis\n were dominant on the cheese surface [CLS]  at day 35 of ripening. These yeasts\n were also the dominant species in Munster and Livarot cheeses ( Larpin et al., 2006), and it was previously shown that"]]
["bb_train_250", [" communities, \nwith or without Gram-negative bacteria, reached viable cell numbers \nabove 7.9\u20138.0 log10 cfu/g after 5 days of ripening. D. hansenii followed by G. candidum dominated the  [CLS] cheese surface on day 5 with 7.6 log10 cfu/g and 7.1 log10 cfu/g, respectively. After day 5, G. candidum levels remained close to 7.8 log10 cfu/g while the D. hansenii population decreased by 1.0 to 1.5 log10 cfu/g between day 15 and day 35. Y. lipolytica [CLS]  levels slightly increased after day 5 and reached a maximum after 35 days with counts of 7.5 log10 cfu/g.\n", " communities, \nwith or without Gram-negative bacteria, reached viable cell numbers \nabove 7.9\u20138.0 log10 cfu/g after 5 days of ripening. D. hansenii followed by G. candidum dominated the  [CLS] cheese surface on day 5 with 7.6 log10 cfu/g and 7.1 log10 cfu/g, respectively. After day 5, G. candidum levels remained close to 7.8 log10 cfu/g while the D. hansenii population decreased by 1.0 to 1.5 log10 cfu/g between day 15 and day 35. Y. lipolytica [CLS]  levels slightly increased after day 5 and reached a maximum after 35 days with counts of 7.5 log10 cfu/g.\n", " [CLS] Y. lipolytica and A. arilaitensis\n were dominant on the cheese surface at day 35 of ripening. These yeasts\n were also the dominant species in Munster and Livarot cheeses [CLS]  ( Larpin et al., 2006), and it was previously shown that two French red-smear soft cheeses were largely dominated by A. arilaitensis ( Feurer et al., 2004).\n", " [CLS] Y. lipolytica and A. arilaitensis\n were dominant on the cheese [CLS]  surface at day 35 of ripening. These yeasts\n were also the dominant species in Munster and Livarot cheeses ( Larpin et al., 2006), and it was previously shown", " [CLS] Y. lipolytica and A. arilaitensis\n were dominant on the cheese surface at day 35 of ripening. These yeasts\n were also the dominant species in Munster and Livarot cheeses [CLS]  ( Larpin et al., 2006), and it was previously shown that two French red-smear soft cheeses were largely dominated by A. arilaitensis ( Feurer et al., 2004).\n", " [CLS] Y. lipolytica and A. arilaitensis\n were dominant on the cheese surface [CLS]  at day 35 of ripening. These yeasts\n were also the dominant species in Munster and Livarot cheeses ( Larpin et al., 2006), and it was previously shown that", " C and D, whereas Geotrichum spp. was found to dominate on the cheese from dairy B. On the cheese from dairy A, Yarrowia lipolytica was the dominating yeast species.  [CLS] Y. lipolytica\n is a naturally developing yeast species on cheese surfaces [CLS] , and has in \nsome cases been shown to rapidly outnumber other yeast species including\n D. hansenii and Geotrichum spp. [33].\n"]]
["bb_train_251", [" [CLS] cheese ecosystems, C. flavescens [CLS]  dominated the cheese surface \nwith 6.4 log10 cfu/g. However, from day 15 to day 35, distribution of \nbacterial species between the cheese without H. alvei (T) and", " [CLS] C. flavescens dominated the cheese [CLS]  surface \nwith 6.4 log10 cfu/g. However, from day 15 to day 35, distribution of \nbacterial species between the cheese without H. alvei (T) and the cheese with", " [CLS] C. flavescens dominated the cheese surface [CLS]  \nwith 6.4 log10 cfu/g. However, from day 15 to day 35, distribution of \nbacterial species between the cheese without H. alvei (T) and the cheese with H."]]
["bb_train_252", [" day 35, distribution of \nbacterial species between the cheese without H. alvei (T) and the cheese with H. alvei (HA2) was different. In the absence of H. alvei,  [CLS] A. arilaitensis dominated the cheese surface [CLS]  with counts of 9.3 log10 cfu/g at day 35. With H. alvei in the cheese ecosystem, the maximal population of A. arilaitensis was 7.4 log10 cfu/g at day 35.", " day 35, distribution of \nbacterial species between the cheese without H. alvei (T) and the cheese with H. alvei (HA2) was different. In the absence of H. alvei,  [CLS] A. arilaitensis dominated the cheese [CLS]  surface with counts of 9.3 log10 cfu/g at day 35. With H. alvei in the cheese ecosystem, the maximal population of A. arilaitensis was 7.4 log10 cfu/g at day", " (HA2) was different. In the absence of H. alvei, A. arilaitensis dominated the cheese surface with counts of 9.3 log10 cfu/g at day 35. With H. alvei in the  [CLS] cheese ecosystem, the maximal population of A. arilaitensis [CLS]  was 7.4 log10 cfu/g at day 35.\n", " [CLS] A. arilaitensis dominated the cheese [CLS]  surface microbiota with counts of 9.3 log10 cfu/g (85% of the total bacterial counts) when P. celer was not inoculated in the cheese.\n", " [CLS] A. arilaitensis dominated the cheese surface [CLS]  microbiota with counts of 9.3 log10 cfu/g (85% of the total bacterial counts) when P. celer was not inoculated in the cheese.\n", " [CLS] A. arilaitensis dominated the cheese surface microbiota [CLS]  with counts of 9.3 log10 cfu/g (85% of the total bacterial counts) when P. celer was not inoculated in the cheese.\n", " [CLS] A. arilaitensis\n were dominant on the cheese surface at day 35 of ripening. These yeasts\n were also the dominant species in Munster and Livarot cheeses [CLS]  ( Larpin et al., 2006), and it was previously shown that two French red-smear soft cheeses were largely dominated by A. arilaitensis ( Feurer et al., 2004).\n", " [CLS] A. arilaitensis\n were dominant on the cheese [CLS]  surface at day 35 of ripening. These yeasts\n were also the dominant species in Munster and Livarot cheeses ( Larpin et al., 2006), and it was previously shown", " [CLS] A. arilaitensis\n were dominant on the cheese surface [CLS]  at day 35 of ripening. These yeasts\n were also the dominant species in Munster and Livarot cheeses ( Larpin et al., 2006), and it was previously shown that", " [CLS] A. arilaitensis\n were dominant on the cheese surface at day 35 of ripening. These yeasts\n were also the dominant species in Munster and Livarot cheeses [CLS]  ( Larpin et al., 2006), and it was previously shown that two French red-smear soft cheeses were largely dominated by A. arilaitensis ( Feurer et al., 2004).\n", " day 35 of ripening. These yeasts\n were also the dominant species in Munster and Livarot cheeses ( Larpin et al., 2006), and it was previously shown that two  [CLS] French red-smear soft cheeses were largely dominated by A. arilaitensis [CLS]  ( Feurer et al., 2004).\n"]]
["bb_train_253", [" [CLS] Hafnia sp. are frequently detected in milk or smear cheeses [CLS]  ( Mayr et al., 2004, Hantsis-Zacharov and Halpern, 2007, Mounier et al., 2009, Abriouel et al., 2008 and Fontana et al., 2010).\n", " [CLS] Hafnia sp. are frequently detected in milk [CLS]  or smear cheeses ( Mayr et al., 2004, Hantsis-Zacharov and Halpern, 2007, Mounier et al., 2009, Abriouel et al., 2008 and Fontana et al., 2010).\n"]]
["bb_train_254", [" with fruity tastes and are considered to be potent odorants \nin Camembert ( Curioni and Bosset, 2002). The production of 3-methylbutanal and 3-methylbutanol has already been reported in  [CLS] P. phenylpyruvica in a cured meat model [CLS]  system ( Moller et al., 1998), and in Psychrobacter sp. in a model cheese ( Deetae et al., 2009a). When P. celer\n was present in cheeses, 2-pentanone, 2-heptanone"]]
["bb_train_255", [" [CLS] P. celer was able to degrade acids with a lipase activity [CLS] . No information is available on the lipolytic system of this species.H. alvei\n was able to successfully establish itself in the community at the \nbeginning of ripening, regardless"]]
["bb_train_256", [" [CLS] C. variabile/C. casei were also detected in a Gubbeen cheese [CLS]  and were dominant among bacterial species ( Mounier et al., 2005).\n", " has not previously been found on cheese.Several studies have now shown that Corynebacterium spp. is the most dominant bacterial species on surface-ripened cheeses [3, 6, 34]. C. casei and/or  [CLS] C. variabile\n were found in the present study to be the predominant bacterial species\n on the surfaces of the four cheeses and thus potentially important \nduring cheese [CLS]  ripening. These data confirm that strains of Corynebacterium spp. are candidates as ripening cultures for production of surface-ripened cheeses.\n", " has not previously been found on cheese.Several studies have now shown that Corynebacterium spp. is the most dominant bacterial species on surface-ripened cheeses [3, 6, 34]. C. casei and/or  [CLS] C. variabile\n were found in the present study to be the predominant bacterial species\n on the surfaces of the four cheeses [CLS]  and thus potentially important \nduring cheese ripening. These data confirm that strains of Corynebacterium spp. are candidates as ripening cultures for production of surface-ripened cheeses.\n"]]
["bb_train_257", [" [CLS] C. casei were also detected in a Gubbeen cheese [CLS]  and were dominant among bacterial species ( Mounier et al., 2005).\n", " to our knowledge, has not previously been found on cheese.Several studies have now shown that Corynebacterium spp. is the most dominant bacterial species on surface-ripened cheeses [3, 6, 34].  [CLS] C. casei and/or C. variabile\n were found in the present study to be the predominant bacterial species\n on the surfaces of the four cheeses [CLS]  and thus potentially important \nduring cheese ripening. These data confirm that strains of Corynebacterium spp. are candidates as ripening cultures for production of surface-ripened cheeses.\n", " to our knowledge, has not previously been found on cheese.Several studies have now shown that Corynebacterium spp. is the most dominant bacterial species on surface-ripened cheeses [3, 6, 34].  [CLS] C. casei and/or C. variabile\n were found in the present study to be the predominant bacterial species\n on the surfaces of the four cheeses and thus potentially important \nduring cheese [CLS]  ripening. These data confirm that strains of Corynebacterium spp. are candidates as ripening cultures for production of surface-ripened cheeses.\n"]]
["bb_train_258", [" of the 26S rRNA gene, respectively. At the end of \nripening, the cheese core microbiota of the farmhouse cheeses consisted \nof the mesophilic lactic acid bacteria (LAB)  [CLS] starter cultures Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis [CLS]  and Leuconostoc mesenteorides as well as non-starter LAB including different Lactobacillus spp. The cheese from the industrial dairy was almost exclusively dominated by Lb. paracasei. The surface bacterial microbiota", " yeast isolates were identified by sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene\n or the D1/D2 domain of the 26S rRNA gene, respectively. At the end of \nripening, the  [CLS] cheese core microbiota of the farmhouse cheeses consisted \nof the mesophilic lactic acid bacteria (LAB) starter cultures Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis [CLS]  and Leuconostoc mesenteorides as well as non-starter LAB including different Lactobacillus spp. The cheese from the industrial dairy was almost exclusively dominated by Lb. paracasei. The surface bacterial microbiota", " sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene\n or the D1/D2 domain of the 26S rRNA gene, respectively. At the end of \nripening, the cheese core microbiota of the  [CLS] farmhouse cheeses consisted \nof the mesophilic lactic acid bacteria (LAB) starter cultures Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis [CLS]  and Leuconostoc mesenteorides as well as non-starter LAB including different Lactobacillus spp. The cheese from the industrial dairy was almost exclusively dominated by Lb. paracasei. The surface bacterial microbiota", " yeast isolates were identified by sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene\n or the D1/D2 domain of the 26S rRNA gene, respectively. At the end of \nripening, the  [CLS] cheese core microbiota of the farmhouse cheeses consisted \nof the mesophilic lactic acid bacteria (LAB) starter cultures Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis [CLS]  and Leuconostoc mesenteorides as well as non-starter LAB including different Lactobacillus spp. The cheese from the industrial dairy was almost exclusively dominated by Lb. paracasei. The surface bacterial microbiota", " [CLS] starter \ncultures Leuconostoc mesenteroides and Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis [CLS]  (Table 3). Furthermore, the cheeses from dairies A and C were dominated by the non-starter lactic acid bacteria (NSLAB) Lactobacillus paracasei, and for the cheese from dairy A, a", " [CLS] cheeses \nfrom dairies A and C were primarily dominated by the LAB starter \ncultures Leuconostoc mesenteroides and Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis [CLS]  (Table 3). Furthermore, the cheeses from dairies A and C were dominated by the non-starter lactic acid bacteria (NSLAB) Lactobacillus paracasei, and for the cheese from dairy A, a", " [CLS] cheeses \nfrom dairies A and C were primarily dominated by the LAB starter \ncultures Leuconostoc mesenteroides and Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis [CLS]  (Table 3). Furthermore, the cheeses from dairies A and C were dominated by the non-starter lactic acid bacteria (NSLAB) Lactobacillus paracasei, and for the cheese from dairy A, a", " [CLS] Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis survives better in cheese [CLS]  than Lc. lactis subsp. cremoris [8].\n This fact even though not examined in the present study suggests that \nthe level of autolysis of the latter is the"]]
["bb_train_259", ["\n or the D1/D2 domain of the 26S rRNA gene, respectively. At the end of \nripening, the cheese core microbiota of the farmhouse cheeses consisted \nof the  [CLS] mesophilic lactic acid bacteria (LAB) starter cultures Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis [CLS]  and Leuconostoc mesenteorides as well as non-starter LAB including different Lactobacillus spp. The cheese from the industrial dairy was almost exclusively dominated by Lb. paracasei. The surface bacterial microbiota", " or the D1/D2 domain of the 26S rRNA gene, respectively. At the end of \nripening, the cheese core microbiota of the farmhouse cheeses consisted \nof the mesophilic  [CLS] lactic acid bacteria (LAB) starter cultures Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis [CLS]  and Leuconostoc mesenteorides as well as non-starter LAB including different Lactobacillus spp. The cheese from the industrial dairy was almost exclusively dominated by Lb. paracasei. The surface bacterial microbiota", " [CLS] LAB starter \ncultures Leuconostoc mesenteroides and Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis [CLS]  (Table 3). Furthermore, the cheeses from dairies A and C were dominated by the non-starter lactic acid bacteria (NSLAB) Lactobacillus paracasei, and for the cheese from dairy A, a"]]
["bb_train_260", [" of the 26S rRNA gene, respectively. At the end of \nripening, the cheese core microbiota of the farmhouse cheeses consisted \nof the mesophilic lactic acid bacteria (LAB)  [CLS] starter cultures Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis and Leuconostoc mesenteorides [CLS]  as well as non-starter LAB including different Lactobacillus spp. The cheese from the industrial dairy was almost exclusively dominated by Lb. paracasei. The surface bacterial microbiota of all four", " sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene\n or the D1/D2 domain of the 26S rRNA gene, respectively. At the end of \nripening, the cheese core microbiota of the  [CLS] farmhouse cheeses consisted \nof the mesophilic lactic acid bacteria (LAB) starter cultures Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis and Leuconostoc mesenteorides [CLS]  as well as non-starter LAB including different Lactobacillus spp. The cheese from the industrial dairy was almost exclusively dominated by Lb. paracasei. The surface bacterial microbiota of all four", " yeast isolates were identified by sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene\n or the D1/D2 domain of the 26S rRNA gene, respectively. At the end of \nripening, the  [CLS] cheese core microbiota of the farmhouse cheeses consisted \nof the mesophilic lactic acid bacteria (LAB) starter cultures Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis and Leuconostoc mesenteorides [CLS]  as well as non-starter LAB including different Lactobacillus spp. The cheese from the industrial dairy was almost exclusively dominated by Lb. paracasei. The surface bacterial microbiota of all four", " yeast isolates were identified by sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene\n or the D1/D2 domain of the 26S rRNA gene, respectively. At the end of \nripening, the  [CLS] cheese core microbiota of the farmhouse cheeses consisted \nof the mesophilic lactic acid bacteria (LAB) starter cultures Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis and Leuconostoc mesenteorides [CLS]  as well as non-starter LAB including different Lactobacillus spp. The cheese from the industrial dairy was almost exclusively dominated by Lb. paracasei. The surface bacterial microbiota of all four"]]
["bb_train_261", [" or the D1/D2 domain of the 26S rRNA gene, respectively. At the end of \nripening, the cheese core microbiota of the farmhouse cheeses consisted \nof the mesophilic  [CLS] lactic acid bacteria (LAB) starter cultures Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis and Leuconostoc mesenteorides [CLS]  as well as non-starter LAB including different Lactobacillus spp. The cheese from the industrial dairy was almost exclusively dominated by Lb. paracasei. The surface bacterial microbiota of all four", "\n or the D1/D2 domain of the 26S rRNA gene, respectively. At the end of \nripening, the cheese core microbiota of the farmhouse cheeses consisted \nof the  [CLS] mesophilic lactic acid bacteria (LAB) starter cultures Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis and Leuconostoc mesenteorides [CLS]  as well as non-starter LAB including different Lactobacillus spp. The cheese from the industrial dairy was almost exclusively dominated by Lb. paracasei. The surface bacterial microbiota of all four"]]
["bb_train_262", [" sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene\n or the D1/D2 domain of the 26S rRNA gene, respectively. At the end of \nripening, the cheese core microbiota of the  [CLS] farmhouse cheeses consisted \nof the mesophilic lactic acid bacteria (LAB) starter cultures Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis and Leuconostoc mesenteorides as well as non-starter LAB including different Lactobacillus spp. [CLS]  The cheese from the industrial dairy was almost exclusively dominated by Lb. paracasei. The surface bacterial microbiota of all four cheeses were dominated by Corynebacterium spp. and/or Brachybacterium spp.", " yeast isolates were identified by sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene\n or the D1/D2 domain of the 26S rRNA gene, respectively. At the end of \nripening, the  [CLS] cheese core microbiota of the farmhouse cheeses consisted \nof the mesophilic lactic acid bacteria (LAB) starter cultures Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis and Leuconostoc mesenteorides as well as non-starter LAB including different Lactobacillus spp. [CLS]  The cheese from the industrial dairy was almost exclusively dominated by Lb. paracasei. The surface bacterial microbiota of all four cheeses were dominated by Corynebacterium spp. and/or Brachybacterium spp.", " yeast isolates were identified by sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene\n or the D1/D2 domain of the 26S rRNA gene, respectively. At the end of \nripening, the  [CLS] cheese core microbiota of the farmhouse cheeses consisted \nof the mesophilic lactic acid bacteria (LAB) starter cultures Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis and Leuconostoc mesenteorides as well as non-starter LAB including different Lactobacillus spp. [CLS]  The cheese from the industrial dairy was almost exclusively dominated by Lb. paracasei. The surface bacterial microbiota of all four cheeses were dominated by Corynebacterium spp. and/or Brachybacterium spp."]]
["bb_train_263", ["\n or the D1/D2 domain of the 26S rRNA gene, respectively. At the end of \nripening, the cheese core microbiota of the farmhouse cheeses consisted \nof the  [CLS] mesophilic lactic acid bacteria (LAB) starter cultures Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis and Leuconostoc mesenteorides as well as non-starter LAB including different Lactobacillus spp. [CLS]  The cheese from the industrial dairy was almost exclusively dominated by Lb. paracasei. The surface bacterial microbiota of all four cheeses were dominated by Corynebacterium spp. and/or Brachybacterium spp."]]
["bb_train_264", [" cheeses consisted \nof the mesophilic lactic acid bacteria (LAB) starter cultures Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis and Leuconostoc mesenteorides as well as non-starter LAB including different Lactobacillus spp. The  [CLS] cheese from the industrial dairy was almost exclusively dominated by Lb. paracasei [CLS] . The surface bacterial microbiota of all four cheeses were dominated by Corynebacterium spp. and/or Brachybacterium spp. Brevibacterium spp. was found to be subdominant compared to other bacteria on the", " D were primarily dominated by NSLAB. The cheese from dairy\n B was dominated by a range of NSLAB including Lb. brevis, Lb. oligofermentans and Lb. farminis, whereas the  [CLS] cheese from dairy D was exclusively dominated by the NSLAB Lb. paracasei [CLS] . Additionally, minor groups of the LAB starter cultures Lc. lactis subsp. lactis and Lc. lactis subsp. cremoris were found on the cheeses from dairies B and D, respectively.\n", " the primary LAB starter culture. Contrary, the NSLAB Lactobacillus paracasei was found in three out of four cheeses. This confirms the findings by Antonsson et al. [1], who found  [CLS] Lb. paracasei to be the main NSLAB in several Danbo cheeses [CLS] .\n"]]
["bb_train_265", [" lactis subsp. lactis and Leuconostoc mesenteorides as well as non-starter LAB including different Lactobacillus spp. The cheese from the industrial dairy was almost exclusively dominated by Lb. paracasei. The  [CLS] surface bacterial microbiota of all four cheeses were dominated by Corynebacterium spp. [CLS]  and/or Brachybacterium spp. Brevibacterium spp. was found to be subdominant compared to other bacteria on the farmhouse cheeses, and no Brevibacterium spp. was found on the cheese from the", " as well as non-starter LAB including different Lactobacillus spp. The cheese from the industrial dairy was almost exclusively dominated by Lb. paracasei. The surface bacterial microbiota of all four  [CLS] cheeses were dominated by Corynebacterium spp. [CLS]  and/or Brachybacterium spp. Brevibacterium spp. was found to be subdominant compared to other bacteria on the farmhouse cheeses, and no Brevibacterium spp. was found on the cheese from the", " LAB including different Lactobacillus spp. The cheese from the industrial dairy was almost exclusively dominated by Lb. paracasei. The surface bacterial microbiota of all four cheeses were dominated by  [CLS] Corynebacterium spp. and/or Brachybacterium spp. Brevibacterium spp. was found to be subdominant compared to other bacteria on the farmhouse cheeses [CLS] , and no Brevibacterium spp. was found on the cheese from the industrial dairy, even though B. linens was used as surface-ripening culture. Moreover, Gram-negative bacteria identified as Alcalignes faecalis", " ripening as it assimilates lactate and produces alkaline \nmetabolites such as ammonia thereby increasing pH of the cheese surface [23, 46], which enables the growth of the less  [CLS] acid tolerant bacterial microbiota, primarily Gram-positive coryneforms (Brevibacterium spp., Corynebacterium spp. [CLS]  and Microbacterium spp.) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and Gram-negative Halomonas spp., Vibrio spp. and Proteus spp., and bacteria of the Enterobacteriaceae family", " \nthe ripening room. D. hansenii is important during \ncheese ripening as it assimilates lactate and produces alkaline \nmetabolites such as ammonia thereby increasing pH of the  [CLS] cheese surface [23, 46], which enables the growth of the less acid tolerant bacterial microbiota, primarily Gram-positive coryneforms (Brevibacterium spp., Corynebacterium spp. [CLS]  and Microbacterium spp.) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and Gram-negative Halomonas spp., Vibrio spp. and Proteus spp., and bacteria of the Enterobacteriaceae family", " [16], whereas the soil bacteria B. permense found on the cheese from dairy A, to our knowledge, has not previously been found on cheese.Several studies have now shown that  [CLS] Corynebacterium spp. is the most dominant bacterial species on surface-ripened cheeses [CLS]  [3, 6, 34]. C. casei and/or C. variabile\n were found in the present study to be the predominant bacterial species\n on the surfaces of the four cheeses", " study to be the predominant bacterial species\n on the surfaces of the four cheeses and thus potentially important \nduring cheese ripening. These data confirm that strains of  [CLS] Corynebacterium spp. are candidates as ripening cultures for production of surface-ripened cheeses [CLS] .\n", " study to be the predominant bacterial species\n on the surfaces of the four cheeses and thus potentially important \nduring cheese ripening. These data confirm that strains of  [CLS] Corynebacterium spp. are candidates as ripening cultures [CLS]  for production of surface-ripened cheeses.\n"]]
["bb_train_266", [" as well as non-starter LAB including different Lactobacillus spp. The cheese from the industrial dairy was almost exclusively dominated by Lb. paracasei. The surface bacterial microbiota of all four  [CLS] cheeses were dominated by Corynebacterium spp. and/or Brachybacterium spp. [CLS]  Brevibacterium spp. was found to be subdominant compared to other bacteria on the farmhouse cheeses, and no Brevibacterium spp. was found on the cheese from the industrial dairy, even", " Lactobacillus spp. The cheese from the industrial dairy was almost exclusively dominated by Lb. paracasei. The surface bacterial microbiota of all four cheeses were dominated by Corynebacterium spp. and/or  [CLS] Brachybacterium spp. Brevibacterium spp. was found to be subdominant compared to other bacteria on the farmhouse cheeses [CLS] , and no Brevibacterium spp. was found on the cheese from the industrial dairy, even though B. linens was used as surface-ripening culture. Moreover, Gram-negative bacteria identified as Alcalignes faecalis", " lactis subsp. lactis and Leuconostoc mesenteorides as well as non-starter LAB including different Lactobacillus spp. The cheese from the industrial dairy was almost exclusively dominated by Lb. paracasei. The  [CLS] surface bacterial microbiota of all four cheeses were dominated by Corynebacterium spp. and/or Brachybacterium spp. [CLS]  Brevibacterium spp. was found to be subdominant compared to other bacteria on the farmhouse cheeses, and no Brevibacterium spp. was found on the cheese from the industrial dairy, even"]]
["bb_train_267", [" The cheese from the industrial dairy was almost exclusively dominated by Lb. paracasei. The surface bacterial microbiota of all four cheeses were dominated by Corynebacterium spp. and/or Brachybacterium spp.  [CLS] Brevibacterium spp. was found to be subdominant compared to other bacteria on the farmhouse cheeses [CLS] , and no Brevibacterium spp. was found on the cheese from the industrial dairy, even though B. linens was used as surface-ripening culture. Moreover, Gram-negative bacteria identified as Alcalignes faecalis", " of all four cheeses were dominated by Corynebacterium spp. and/or Brachybacterium spp. Brevibacterium spp. was found to be subdominant compared to other bacteria on the farmhouse cheeses, and no  [CLS] Brevibacterium spp. was found on the cheese from the industrial dairy [CLS] , even though B. linens was used as surface-ripening culture. Moreover, Gram-negative bacteria identified as Alcalignes faecalis and Proteus vulgaris\n were found on one of the farmhouse cheeses. The", " \nthe ripening room. D. hansenii is important during \ncheese ripening as it assimilates lactate and produces alkaline \nmetabolites such as ammonia thereby increasing pH of the  [CLS] cheese surface [23, 46], which enables the growth of the less acid tolerant bacterial microbiota, primarily Gram-positive coryneforms (Brevibacterium spp. [CLS] , Corynebacterium spp. and Microbacterium spp.) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and Gram-negative Halomonas spp., Vibrio spp. and Proteus spp., and bacteria of the", " ripening as it assimilates lactate and produces alkaline \nmetabolites such as ammonia thereby increasing pH of the cheese surface [23, 46], which enables the growth of the less  [CLS] acid tolerant bacterial microbiota, primarily Gram-positive coryneforms (Brevibacterium spp. [CLS] , Corynebacterium spp. and Microbacterium spp.) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and Gram-negative Halomonas spp., Vibrio spp. and Proteus spp., and bacteria of the", " [CLS] Brevibacterium spp. were found on the cheeses from the farmhouses [CLS]  (dairies A, B and C). B. linens and B. aurantiacum,\n found on the cheeses from dairies B and C, respectively, have been used\n for a long time"]]
["bb_train_268", [" by Corynebacterium spp. and/or Brachybacterium spp. Brevibacterium spp. was found to be subdominant compared to other bacteria on the farmhouse cheeses, and no Brevibacterium spp. was found on the  [CLS] cheese from the industrial dairy, even though B. linens [CLS]  was used as surface-ripening culture. Moreover, Gram-negative bacteria identified as Alcalignes faecalis and Proteus vulgaris\n were found on one of the farmhouse cheeses. The surface yeast \nmicrobiota", " spp. was found to be subdominant compared to other bacteria on the farmhouse cheeses, and no Brevibacterium spp. was found on the cheese from the industrial dairy, even though  [CLS] B. linens was used as surface-ripening culture [CLS] . Moreover, Gram-negative bacteria identified as Alcalignes faecalis and Proteus vulgaris\n were found on one of the farmhouse cheeses. The surface yeast \nmicrobiota consisted primarily of one dominating", " of Brachybacterium alimentarum. Various Brevibacterium species were found on the cheeses from the farmhouses (dairies A, B and C). B. permense was found on the cheese from dairy A,  [CLS] B. linens was found on the cheese from dairy B [CLS]  and B. aurantiacum was found on the cheese from dairy C. Brevibacterium\n spp. could not be isolated on the cheese from dairy D. Furthermore, a \nnumber of", " [CLS] B. linens was usually reported to be the most important bacterial species associated with cheese [CLS]  surfaces [13, 28, 49]. In the present study, various Brevibacterium spp. were found on the cheeses from the farmhouses (dairies A, B and C). B. linens and B. aurantiacum,", " [CLS] B. linens was usually reported to be the most important bacterial species associated with cheese surfaces [CLS]  [13, 28, 49]. In the present study, various Brevibacterium spp. were found on the cheeses from the farmhouses (dairies A, B and C). B. linens and B. aurantiacum,\n", " bacterial species associated with cheese surfaces [13, 28, 49]. In the present study, various Brevibacterium spp. were found on the cheeses from the farmhouses (dairies A, B and C).  [CLS] B. linens and B. aurantiacum,\n found on the cheeses from dairies B and C, respectively, have been used\n for a long time as ripening cultures [CLS]  by the dairy industry [16], whereas the soil bacteria B. permense found on the cheese from dairy A, to our knowledge, has not previously been found on cheese.Several studies", " bacterial species associated with cheese surfaces [13, 28, 49]. In the present study, various Brevibacterium spp. were found on the cheeses from the farmhouses (dairies A, B and C).  [CLS] B. linens and B. aurantiacum,\n found on the cheeses from dairies B and C [CLS] , respectively, have been used\n for a long time as ripening cultures by the dairy industry [16], whereas the soil bacteria B. permense found on the cheese from dairy", " bacterial species associated with cheese surfaces [13, 28, 49]. In the present study, various Brevibacterium spp. were found on the cheeses from the farmhouses (dairies A, B and C).  [CLS] B. linens and B. aurantiacum,\n found on the cheeses from dairies B [CLS]  and C, respectively, have been used\n for a long time as ripening cultures by the dairy industry [16], whereas the soil bacteria B. permense found on the cheese"]]
["bb_train_269", [" farmhouse cheeses, and no Brevibacterium spp. was found on the cheese from the industrial dairy, even though B. linens was used as surface-ripening culture. Moreover, Gram-negative bacteria identified as  [CLS] Alcalignes faecalis and Proteus vulgaris\n were found on one of the farmhouse cheeses [CLS] . The surface yeast \nmicrobiota consisted primarily of one dominating species for each \ncheese. For the farmhouse cheeses, the dominant yeast species were Yarrowia lipolytica, Geotrichum spp. and"]]
["bb_train_270", [" other bacteria on the farmhouse cheeses, and no Brevibacterium spp. was found on the cheese from the industrial dairy, even though B. linens was used as surface-ripening culture. Moreover,  [CLS] Gram-negative bacteria identified as Alcalignes faecalis [CLS]  and Proteus vulgaris\n were found on one of the farmhouse cheeses. The surface yeast \nmicrobiota consisted primarily of one dominating species for each \ncheese. For the"]]
["bb_train_271", [" no Brevibacterium spp. was found on the cheese from the industrial dairy, even though B. linens was used as surface-ripening culture. Moreover, Gram-negative bacteria identified as Alcalignes faecalis and  [CLS] Proteus vulgaris\n were found on one of the farmhouse cheeses [CLS] . The surface yeast \nmicrobiota consisted primarily of one dominating species for each \ncheese. For the farmhouse cheeses, the dominant yeast species were Yarrowia lipolytica, Geotrichum spp. and", " Staphylococcus saprophyticus on the cheeses from dairies B and D, and Staph. equorum on the cheeses from dairies C and D. Finally, a number of Gram-negative bacteria species including  [CLS] Proteus vulgaris and Alcaligenes faecalis was found on the cheese from dairy C [CLS] .Figure 3\n shows the grouping of the surface yeast microbiota. The yeast surface \nmicrobiota on the three farmhouse cheeses consisted of two to four \ngroups, whereas the", " [CLS] Gram-negative bacterial microbiota consisting of Proteus vulgaris [CLS]  and Alcaligenes faecalis was found on cheese from dairy C. A previous study has focused on P. vulgaris as cheese ripening culture [11]. P. vulgaris\n was found to", " [CLS] Proteus vulgaris and Alcaligenes faecalis was found on cheese from dairy C [CLS] . A previous study has focused on P. vulgaris as cheese ripening culture [11]. P. vulgaris\n was found to produce important flavour notes including aldehydes and \nacids, but"]]
["bb_train_272", [" other bacteria on the farmhouse cheeses, and no Brevibacterium spp. was found on the cheese from the industrial dairy, even though B. linens was used as surface-ripening culture. Moreover,  [CLS] Gram-negative bacteria identified as Alcalignes faecalis and Proteus vulgaris [CLS] \n were found on one of the farmhouse cheeses. The surface yeast \nmicrobiota consisted primarily of one dominating species for each \ncheese. For the farmhouse cheeses, the", " staphylococci were found, i.e., Staphylococcus saprophyticus on the cheeses from dairies B and D, and Staph. equorum on the cheeses from dairies C and D. Finally, a number of  [CLS] Gram-negative bacteria species including Proteus vulgaris [CLS]  and Alcaligenes faecalis was found on the cheese from dairy C.Figure 3\n shows the grouping of the surface yeast microbiota. The yeast surface \nmicrobiota on the three", " [CLS] Gram-negative bacterial microbiota consisting of Proteus vulgaris [CLS]  and Alcaligenes faecalis was found on cheese from dairy C. A previous study has focused on P. vulgaris as cheese ripening culture [11]. P. vulgaris\n was found to"]]
["bb_train_273", [" and Proteus vulgaris\n were found on one of the farmhouse cheeses. The surface yeast \nmicrobiota consisted primarily of one dominating species for each \ncheese. For the  [CLS] farmhouse cheeses, the dominant yeast species were Yarrowia lipolytica, Geotrichum spp. [CLS]  and Debaryomyces hansenii, respectively, and for the cheese from the industrial dairy, D. hansenii was the dominant yeast species. Additionally, denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) analysis revealed that Streptococcus", " dairy (dairy D) \nconsisted of only one single group. The cheese from dairy A was equally \ndominated by Yarrowia lipolytica and Scopulariopsis brevicaulis. The yeast microbiota on  [CLS] cheese from dairy B was primarily dominated by Geotrichum spp. [CLS] , however, Kluyveromyces marxianus and Debaryomyces hansenii were additionally found in minor amounts. The cheese from dairy C was dominated by D. hansenii followed by a minor group of Geothrichum", " at the industrial dairy (dairy D) \nconsisted of only one single group. The cheese from dairy A was equally \ndominated by Yarrowia lipolytica and Scopulariopsis brevicaulis. The  [CLS] yeast microbiota on cheese from dairy B was primarily dominated by Geotrichum spp. [CLS] , however, Kluyveromyces marxianus and Debaryomyces hansenii were additionally found in minor amounts. The cheese from dairy C was dominated by D. hansenii followed by a minor group of Geothrichum", " [CLS] Geotrichum spp. are the dominating yeast species on surface-ripened cheeses [CLS] . D. hansenii was found to be the dominating yeast species on the cheeses from dairies C and D, whereas Geotrichum spp. was found to dominate on the cheese from", " Geotrichum spp. are the dominating yeast species on surface-ripened cheeses. D. hansenii was found to be the dominating yeast species on the cheeses from dairies C and D, whereas  [CLS] Geotrichum spp. was found to dominate on the cheese from dairy B [CLS] . On the cheese from dairy A, Yarrowia lipolytica was the dominating yeast species. Y. lipolytica\n is a naturally developing yeast species on cheese surfaces, and has in ", " on the cheese from dairy B. On the cheese from dairy A, Yarrowia lipolytica was the dominating yeast species. Y. lipolytica\n is a naturally developing yeast species on  [CLS] cheese surfaces, and has in \nsome cases been shown to rapidly outnumber other yeast species including\n D. hansenii and Geotrichum spp. [CLS]  [33].\n"]]
["bb_train_274", [" spp. and Debaryomyces hansenii, respectively, and for the cheese from the industrial dairy, D. hansenii was the dominant yeast species. Additionally, denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) analysis revealed that  [CLS] Streptococcus thermophilus was present in the farmhouse raw milk cheese [CLS]  analysed in this study. Furthermore, DGGE bands corresponding to Vagococcus carniphilus, Psychrobacter spp. and Lb. curvatus on the cheese surfaces indicated that these bacterial species may play a role", " [CLS] starter cultures (e.g., mesophilic Lactocococcus lactis or thermophilic Streptococcus thermophilus [CLS] ) metabolise residual lactose and citrate to different aroma compounds [17].\n Later, LAB starter numbers decrease with cell death and their \nsubsequent lysis results in release of intracellular", " [CLS] cheese ripening, lactic acid bacteria (LAB) starter cultures (e.g., mesophilic Lactocococcus lactis or thermophilic Streptococcus thermophilus [CLS] ) metabolise residual lactose and citrate to different aroma compounds [17].\n Later, LAB starter numbers decrease with cell death and their \nsubsequent lysis results in release of intracellular", " [CLS] interior of the cheese from dairy A, DGGE band with strong intensity was identified as Streptococcus thermophilus [CLS] . Furthermore, DGGE bands with strong intensities from the cheese surface samples were found to represent Vagococcus carniphilus (the cheeses from dairies A, B and D), Psychrobacter spp. (the cheeses", " [CLS] Streptococcus thermophilus is present in raw milk \ncheese from dairy A [CLS] , even though this thermophilic lactic acid bacterium\n was not included in the mesophilic LAB starter culture used for \nproduction of the raw milk cheese from dairy A.", " close to Arthrobacter bergerei Ca106 (18.6% of the reads, 99.2% perfect match reads). Like for the two other cheeses, Psychrobacter\n species seem to be present in this cheese.  [CLS] Cheese G was probably \nmanufactured with a thermophilic lactic starter culture, since Streptococcus thermophilus [CLS]  and Lactobacillus delbrueckii species were the dominant lactic acid bacteria, in contrast to the two other cheeses, in which Lactococcus lactis was the dominant lactic acid bacterium. Strains related", " reads, 99.2% perfect match reads). Like for the two other cheeses, Psychrobacter\n species seem to be present in this cheese. Cheese G was probably \nmanufactured with a  [CLS] thermophilic lactic starter culture, since Streptococcus thermophilus [CLS]  and Lactobacillus delbrueckii species were the dominant lactic acid bacteria, in contrast to the two other cheeses, in which Lactococcus lactis was the dominant lactic acid bacterium. Strains related"]]
["bb_train_275", [" species. Additionally, denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) analysis revealed that Streptococcus thermophilus was present in the farmhouse raw milk cheese analysed in this study. Furthermore, DGGE bands corresponding to  [CLS] Vagococcus carniphilus, Psychrobacter spp. and Lb. curvatus on the cheese surfaces indicated that these bacterial species may play a role in cheese [CLS]  ripening.\n", " species. Additionally, denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) analysis revealed that Streptococcus thermophilus was present in the farmhouse raw milk cheese analysed in this study. Furthermore, DGGE bands corresponding to  [CLS] Vagococcus carniphilus, Psychrobacter spp. and Lb. curvatus on the cheese surfaces [CLS]  indicated that these bacterial species may play a role in cheese ripening.\n", " the sample from the interior of the cheese from dairy A, DGGE band with strong intensity was identified as Streptococcus thermophilus. Furthermore, DGGE bands with strong intensities from the  [CLS] cheese surface samples were found to represent Vagococcus carniphilus [CLS]  (the cheeses from dairies A, B and D), Psychrobacter spp. (the cheeses from dairies A and C) and Lb. curvatus\n (the cheese from dairy B) indicating that these", " cheese from dairy A, DGGE band with strong intensity was identified as Streptococcus thermophilus. Furthermore, DGGE bands with strong intensities from the cheese surface samples were found to represent  [CLS] Vagococcus carniphilus (the cheeses from dairies A, B [CLS]  and D), Psychrobacter spp. (the cheeses from dairies A and C) and Lb. curvatus\n (the cheese from dairy B) indicating that these bacterial species may \nplay a", " cheese from dairy A, DGGE band with strong intensity was identified as Streptococcus thermophilus. Furthermore, DGGE bands with strong intensities from the cheese surface samples were found to represent  [CLS] Vagococcus carniphilus (the cheeses from dairies A, B and D [CLS] ), Psychrobacter spp. (the cheeses from dairies A and C) and Lb. curvatus\n (the cheese from dairy B) indicating that these bacterial species may \nplay a role in", " cheese from dairy A, DGGE band with strong intensity was identified as Streptococcus thermophilus. Furthermore, DGGE bands with strong intensities from the cheese surface samples were found to represent  [CLS] Vagococcus carniphilus (the cheeses from dairies A, B and D), Psychrobacter spp. (the cheeses from dairies A and C) and Lb. curvatus\n (the cheese from dairy B) indicating that these bacterial species may \nplay a role in cheese [CLS]  ripening, even though they were not found by the \nculture dependent approach. Unfortunately, several major DGGE bands in \nthe samples from the cheese surface could not be", " cheese from dairy A, DGGE band with strong intensity was identified as Streptococcus thermophilus. Furthermore, DGGE bands with strong intensities from the cheese surface samples were found to represent  [CLS] Vagococcus carniphilus (the cheeses from dairies A [CLS] , B and D), Psychrobacter spp. (the cheeses from dairies A and C) and Lb. curvatus\n (the cheese from dairy B) indicating that these bacterial species may \nplay", " confirmed by the culture \nindependent method DGGE, even though the latter technique proved the \npresence of additional cultures including Str. thermophilus in cheese interiors as well as  [CLS] Vagococcus carniphilus, Psychrobacter spp. and Lb. curvatus\n on cheese surfaces [CLS] .\n"]]
["bb_train_276", [" denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) analysis revealed that Streptococcus thermophilus was present in the farmhouse raw milk cheese analysed in this study. Furthermore, DGGE bands corresponding to Vagococcus carniphilus,  [CLS] Psychrobacter spp. and Lb. curvatus on the cheese surfaces [CLS]  indicated that these bacterial species may play a role in cheese ripening.\n", " denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) analysis revealed that Streptococcus thermophilus was present in the farmhouse raw milk cheese analysed in this study. Furthermore, DGGE bands corresponding to Vagococcus carniphilus,  [CLS] Psychrobacter spp. and Lb. curvatus on the cheese surfaces indicated that these bacterial species may play a role in cheese [CLS]  ripening.\n", " identified as Streptococcus thermophilus. Furthermore, DGGE bands with strong intensities from the cheese surface samples were found to represent Vagococcus carniphilus (the cheeses from dairies A, B and D),  [CLS] Psychrobacter spp. (the cheeses from dairies A and C [CLS] ) and Lb. curvatus\n (the cheese from dairy B) indicating that these bacterial species may \nplay a role in cheese ripening, even though they were not found by", " identified as Streptococcus thermophilus. Furthermore, DGGE bands with strong intensities from the cheese surface samples were found to represent Vagococcus carniphilus (the cheeses from dairies A, B and D),  [CLS] Psychrobacter spp. (the cheeses from dairies A and C) and Lb. curvatus\n (the cheese from dairy B) indicating that these bacterial species may \nplay a role in cheese [CLS]  ripening, even though they were not found by the \nculture dependent approach. Unfortunately, several major DGGE bands in \nthe samples from the cheese surface could not be", " the sample from the interior of the cheese from dairy A, DGGE band with strong intensity was identified as Streptococcus thermophilus. Furthermore, DGGE bands with strong intensities from the  [CLS] cheese surface samples were found to represent Vagococcus carniphilus (the cheeses from dairies A, B and D), Psychrobacter spp. [CLS]  (the cheeses from dairies A and C) and Lb. curvatus\n (the cheese from dairy B) indicating that these bacterial species may \nplay a role in cheese ripening,", " identified as Streptococcus thermophilus. Furthermore, DGGE bands with strong intensities from the cheese surface samples were found to represent Vagococcus carniphilus (the cheeses from dairies A, B and D),  [CLS] Psychrobacter spp. (the cheeses from dairies A [CLS]  and C) and Lb. curvatus\n (the cheese from dairy B) indicating that these bacterial species may \nplay a role in cheese ripening, even though they were not", " the culture \nindependent method DGGE, even though the latter technique proved the \npresence of additional cultures including Str. thermophilus in cheese interiors as well as Vagococcus carniphilus,  [CLS] Psychrobacter spp. and Lb. curvatus\n on cheese surfaces [CLS] .\n"]]
["bb_train_277", [" electrophoresis (DGGE) analysis revealed that Streptococcus thermophilus was present in the farmhouse raw milk cheese analysed in this study. Furthermore, DGGE bands corresponding to Vagococcus carniphilus, Psychrobacter spp. and  [CLS] Lb. curvatus on the cheese surfaces indicated that these bacterial species may play a role in cheese [CLS]  ripening.\n", " electrophoresis (DGGE) analysis revealed that Streptococcus thermophilus was present in the farmhouse raw milk cheese analysed in this study. Furthermore, DGGE bands corresponding to Vagococcus carniphilus, Psychrobacter spp. and  [CLS] Lb. curvatus on the cheese surfaces [CLS]  indicated that these bacterial species may play a role in cheese ripening.\n", " from the cheese surface samples were found to represent Vagococcus carniphilus (the cheeses from dairies A, B and D), Psychrobacter spp. (the cheeses from dairies A and C) and  [CLS] Lb. curvatus\n (the cheese from dairy B) indicating that these bacterial species may \nplay a role in cheese [CLS]  ripening, even though they were not found by the \nculture dependent approach. Unfortunately, several major DGGE bands in \nthe samples from the cheese surface could not be", " from the cheese surface samples were found to represent Vagococcus carniphilus (the cheeses from dairies A, B and D), Psychrobacter spp. (the cheeses from dairies A and C) and  [CLS] Lb. curvatus\n (the cheese from dairy B [CLS] ) indicating that these bacterial species may \nplay a role in cheese ripening, even though they were not found by the \nculture dependent approach. Unfortunately, several major DGGE", " the sample from the interior of the cheese from dairy A, DGGE band with strong intensity was identified as Streptococcus thermophilus. Furthermore, DGGE bands with strong intensities from the  [CLS] cheese surface samples were found to represent Vagococcus carniphilus (the cheeses from dairies A, B and D), Psychrobacter spp. (the cheeses from dairies A and C) and Lb. curvatus [CLS] \n (the cheese from dairy B) indicating that these bacterial species may \nplay a role in cheese ripening, even though they were not found by the \nculture", "\nindependent method DGGE, even though the latter technique proved the \npresence of additional cultures including Str. thermophilus in cheese interiors as well as Vagococcus carniphilus, Psychrobacter spp. and  [CLS] Lb. curvatus\n on cheese surfaces [CLS] .\n"]]
["bb_train_278", [" [CLS] starter cultures (e.g., mesophilic Lactocococcus lactis [CLS]  or thermophilic Streptococcus thermophilus) metabolise residual lactose and citrate to different aroma compounds [17].\n Later, LAB starter numbers decrease with cell death and their \nsubsequent lysis results", " [CLS] cheese ripening, lactic acid bacteria (LAB) starter cultures (e.g., mesophilic Lactocococcus lactis [CLS]  or thermophilic Streptococcus thermophilus) metabolise residual lactose and citrate to different aroma compounds [17].\n Later, LAB starter numbers decrease with cell death and their \nsubsequent lysis results"]]
["bb_train_279", [" [CLS] lactic acid bacteria (LAB) starter cultures (e.g., mesophilic Lactocococcus lactis [CLS]  or thermophilic Streptococcus thermophilus) metabolise residual lactose and citrate to different aroma compounds [17].\n Later, LAB starter numbers decrease with cell death and their \nsubsequent lysis results", "\n harbour a complex microbiota characterised by a succession of different\n microorganisms during milk coagulation and ripening [24]. During cheese ripening, lactic acid bacteria (LAB) starter cultures (e.g.,  [CLS] mesophilic Lactocococcus lactis [CLS]  or thermophilic Streptococcus thermophilus) metabolise residual lactose and citrate to different aroma compounds [17].\n Later, LAB starter numbers decrease with cell death and their \nsubsequent lysis results"]]
["bb_train_280", [" microbiota characterised by a succession of different\n microorganisms during milk coagulation and ripening [24]. During cheese ripening, lactic acid bacteria (LAB) starter cultures (e.g., mesophilic Lactocococcus lactis or  [CLS] thermophilic Streptococcus thermophilus [CLS] ) metabolise residual lactose and citrate to different aroma compounds [17].\n Later, LAB starter numbers decrease with cell death and their \nsubsequent lysis results in release of intracellular", " [CLS] lactic acid bacteria (LAB) starter cultures (e.g., mesophilic Lactocococcus lactis or thermophilic Streptococcus thermophilus [CLS] ) metabolise residual lactose and citrate to different aroma compounds [17].\n Later, LAB starter numbers decrease with cell death and their \nsubsequent lysis results in release of intracellular", " [CLS] Streptococcus thermophilus is present in raw milk \ncheese from dairy A, even though this thermophilic lactic acid bacterium [CLS] \n was not included in the mesophilic LAB starter culture used for \nproduction of the raw milk cheese from dairy A. No culturable Str. thermophilus isolates was isolated", " [CLS] Streptococcus thermophilus is present in raw milk \ncheese from dairy A, even though this thermophilic [CLS]  lactic acid bacterium\n was not included in the mesophilic LAB starter culture used for \nproduction of the raw milk cheese from dairy A. No culturable Str. thermophilus", " Like for the two other cheeses, Psychrobacter\n species seem to be present in this cheese. Cheese G was probably \nmanufactured with a thermophilic lactic starter culture, since  [CLS] Streptococcus thermophilus and Lactobacillus delbrueckii species were the dominant lactic acid bacteria [CLS] , in contrast to the two other cheeses, in which Lactococcus lactis was the dominant lactic acid bacterium. Strains related to other reference strains sequenced in the present study, such", " reads, 99.2% perfect match reads). Like for the two other cheeses, Psychrobacter\n species seem to be present in this cheese. Cheese G was probably \nmanufactured with a  [CLS] thermophilic lactic starter culture, since Streptococcus thermophilus [CLS]  and Lactobacillus delbrueckii species were the dominant lactic acid bacteria, in contrast to the two other cheeses, in which Lactococcus lactis was the dominant lactic acid bacterium. Strains related", " [CLS] production of exopolysaccharides by LAB has been correlated to specific gene clusters tagged as eps or cps, located, as in Streptococcus thermophilus [CLS]  or Lactobacillus plantarum, mainly on the bacterial chromosome (Stingele et al. 1996; De Vuyst and Degeest 1999; Siezen et al. 2010) or in species such as Lactococcus lactis and", " [CLS] LAB has been correlated to specific gene clusters tagged as eps or cps, located, as in Streptococcus thermophilus [CLS]  or Lactobacillus plantarum, mainly on the bacterial chromosome (Stingele et al. 1996; De Vuyst and Degeest 1999; Siezen et al. 2010) or in species such as Lactococcus lactis and"]]
["bb_train_281", [" [CLS] semi-soft cheeses and additionally Geotrichum candidum for soft cheeses) and coagulase-negative staphylococci [CLS]  (Staphylococcus equorum) are present [3, 21, 26]. Generally, D. hansenii\n and staphylococci on cheese surface are assumed to originate from the \ncheese brine, which often is not", " [CLS] soft cheeses) and coagulase-negative staphylococci [CLS]  (Staphylococcus equorum) are present [3, 21, 26]. Generally, D. hansenii\n and staphylococci on cheese surface are assumed to originate from the \ncheese brine, which often is not", " yeasts (primarily Debaryomyces hansenii for semi-soft cheeses and additionally Geotrichum candidum for soft cheeses) and coagulase-negative staphylococci (Staphylococcus equorum) are present [3, 21, 26]. Generally, D. hansenii\n and  [CLS] staphylococci on cheese surface are assumed to originate from the \ncheese brine [CLS] , which often is not changed or pasteurised between salting \nof different batches [2, 3, 42]. For D. hansenii, Petersen et al. [46] showed that the dominating D. hansenii", " yeasts (primarily Debaryomyces hansenii for semi-soft cheeses and additionally Geotrichum candidum for soft cheeses) and coagulase-negative staphylococci (Staphylococcus equorum) are present [3, 21, 26]. Generally, D. hansenii\n and  [CLS] staphylococci on cheese surface [CLS]  are assumed to originate from the \ncheese brine, which often is not changed or pasteurised between salting \nof different batches [2, 3, 42]. For D. hansenii, Petersen"]]
["bb_train_282", [" [CLS] coagulase-negative staphylococci [CLS]  (Staphylococcus equorum) are present [3, 21, 26]. Generally, D. hansenii\n and staphylococci on cheese surface are assumed to originate from the \ncheese brine, which often is not", " and B. aurantiacum was found on the cheese from dairy C. Brevibacterium\n spp. could not be isolated on the cheese from dairy D. Furthermore, a \nnumber of  [CLS] coagulase negative staphylococci [CLS]  were found, i.e., Staphylococcus saprophyticus on the cheeses from dairies B and D, and Staph. equorum on the cheeses from dairies C and D. Finally, a number of Gram-negative"]]
["bb_train_283", [" \nthe ripening room. D. hansenii is important during \ncheese ripening as it assimilates lactate and produces alkaline \nmetabolites such as ammonia thereby increasing pH of the  [CLS] cheese surface [23, 46], which enables the growth of the less acid tolerant bacterial microbiota, primarily Gram-positive coryneforms [CLS]  (Brevibacterium spp., Corynebacterium spp. and Microbacterium spp.) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and Gram-negative Halomonas spp., Vibrio spp. and Proteus spp., and bacteria"]]
["bb_train_284", [" and produces alkaline \nmetabolites such as ammonia thereby increasing pH of the cheese surface [23, 46], which enables the growth of the less acid tolerant bacterial microbiota, primarily  [CLS] Gram-positive coryneforms [CLS]  (Brevibacterium spp., Corynebacterium spp. and Microbacterium spp.) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and Gram-negative Halomonas spp., Vibrio spp. and Proteus spp., and bacteria"]]
["bb_train_285", [" ripening as it assimilates lactate and produces alkaline \nmetabolites such as ammonia thereby increasing pH of the cheese surface [23, 46], which enables the growth of the less  [CLS] acid tolerant bacterial microbiota, primarily Gram-positive coryneforms (Brevibacterium spp. [CLS] , Corynebacterium spp. and Microbacterium spp.) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and Gram-negative Halomonas spp., Vibrio spp. and Proteus spp., and bacteria of the", " and produces alkaline \nmetabolites such as ammonia thereby increasing pH of the cheese surface [23, 46], which enables the growth of the less acid tolerant bacterial microbiota, primarily  [CLS] Gram-positive coryneforms (Brevibacterium spp. [CLS] , Corynebacterium spp. and Microbacterium spp.) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and Gram-negative Halomonas spp., Vibrio spp. and Proteus spp., and bacteria of the"]]
["bb_train_286", [" and produces alkaline \nmetabolites such as ammonia thereby increasing pH of the cheese surface [23, 46], which enables the growth of the less acid tolerant bacterial microbiota, primarily  [CLS] Gram-positive coryneforms (Brevibacterium spp., Corynebacterium spp. [CLS]  and Microbacterium spp.) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and Gram-negative Halomonas spp., Vibrio spp. and Proteus spp., and bacteria of the Enterobacteriaceae family", " ripening as it assimilates lactate and produces alkaline \nmetabolites such as ammonia thereby increasing pH of the cheese surface [23, 46], which enables the growth of the less  [CLS] acid tolerant bacterial microbiota, primarily Gram-positive coryneforms (Brevibacterium spp., Corynebacterium spp. [CLS]  and Microbacterium spp.) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and Gram-negative Halomonas spp., Vibrio spp. and Proteus spp., and bacteria of the Enterobacteriaceae family"]]
["bb_train_287", [" \nthe ripening room. D. hansenii is important during \ncheese ripening as it assimilates lactate and produces alkaline \nmetabolites such as ammonia thereby increasing pH of the  [CLS] cheese surface [23, 46], which enables the growth of the less acid tolerant bacterial microbiota, primarily Gram-positive coryneforms (Brevibacterium spp., Corynebacterium spp. and Microbacterium spp. [CLS] ) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and Gram-negative Halomonas spp., Vibrio spp. and Proteus spp., and bacteria of the Enterobacteriaceae family have been reported", " ripening as it assimilates lactate and produces alkaline \nmetabolites such as ammonia thereby increasing pH of the cheese surface [23, 46], which enables the growth of the less  [CLS] acid tolerant bacterial microbiota, primarily Gram-positive coryneforms (Brevibacterium spp., Corynebacterium spp. and Microbacterium spp. [CLS] ) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and Gram-negative Halomonas spp., Vibrio spp. and Proteus spp., and bacteria of the Enterobacteriaceae family have been reported"]]
["bb_train_288", [" and produces alkaline \nmetabolites such as ammonia thereby increasing pH of the cheese surface [23, 46], which enables the growth of the less acid tolerant bacterial microbiota, primarily  [CLS] Gram-positive coryneforms (Brevibacterium spp., Corynebacterium spp. and Microbacterium spp. [CLS] ) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and Gram-negative Halomonas spp., Vibrio spp. and Proteus spp., and bacteria of the Enterobacteriaceae family have been reported", " ripening as it assimilates lactate and produces alkaline \nmetabolites such as ammonia thereby increasing pH of the cheese surface [23, 46], which enables the growth of the less  [CLS] acid tolerant bacterial microbiota, primarily Gram-positive coryneforms (Brevibacterium spp., Corynebacterium spp. and Microbacterium spp. [CLS] ) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and Gram-negative Halomonas spp., Vibrio spp. and Proteus spp., and bacteria of the Enterobacteriaceae family have been reported"]]
["bb_train_289", [" enables the growth of the less acid tolerant bacterial microbiota, primarily Gram-positive coryneforms (Brevibacterium spp., Corynebacterium spp. and Microbacterium spp.) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive  [CLS] Marinilactibacillus spp. and Gram-negative Halomonas spp., Vibrio spp. and Proteus spp., and bacteria of the Enterobacteriaceae family have been reported to occur on cheese surfaces [CLS]  [14, 15, 25, 34, 35, 41, 50].\n The presence of Gram-negative bacteria was first hypothesised to be \nindicative of hygienic problems. However, more recent results have shown"]]
["bb_train_290", [" which enables the growth of the less acid tolerant bacterial microbiota, primarily Gram-positive coryneforms (Brevibacterium spp., Corynebacterium spp. and Microbacterium spp.) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as  [CLS] Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. [CLS]  and Gram-negative Halomonas spp., Vibrio spp. and Proteus spp., and bacteria of the Enterobacteriaceae family have been reported to occur on cheese surfaces [14, 15, 25, 34, 35, 41,"]]
["bb_train_291", [" the less acid tolerant bacterial microbiota, primarily Gram-positive coryneforms (Brevibacterium spp., Corynebacterium spp. and Microbacterium spp.) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and Gram-negative  [CLS] Halomonas spp., Vibrio spp. and Proteus spp., and bacteria of the Enterobacteriaceae family have been reported to occur on cheese surfaces [14, 15, 25, 34, 35, 41, 50].\n The presence of Gram-negative bacteria was first hypothesised to be \nindicative of hygienic problems. However, more recent results have shown\n that they produce important cheese flavour compounds and thus might \ncontribute positively to the cheese [CLS]  ripening process [11].\n", " the less acid tolerant bacterial microbiota, primarily Gram-positive coryneforms (Brevibacterium spp., Corynebacterium spp. and Microbacterium spp.) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and Gram-negative  [CLS] Halomonas spp., Vibrio spp. and Proteus spp., and bacteria of the Enterobacteriaceae family have been reported to occur on cheese surfaces [CLS]  [14, 15, 25, 34, 35, 41, 50].\n The presence of Gram-negative bacteria was first hypothesised to be \nindicative of hygienic problems. However, more recent results have shown", " the less acid tolerant bacterial microbiota, primarily Gram-positive coryneforms (Brevibacterium spp., Corynebacterium spp. and Microbacterium spp.) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and Gram-negative  [CLS] Halomonas spp., Vibrio spp. and Proteus spp., and bacteria of the Enterobacteriaceae family have been reported to occur on cheese surfaces [14, 15, 25, 34, 35, 41, 50].\n The presence of Gram-negative bacteria was first hypothesised to be \nindicative of hygienic problems. However, more recent results have shown\n that they produce important cheese [CLS]  flavour compounds and thus might \ncontribute positively to the cheese ripening process [11].\n"]]
["bb_train_292", [" of the less acid tolerant bacterial microbiota, primarily Gram-positive coryneforms (Brevibacterium spp., Corynebacterium spp. and Microbacterium spp.) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and  [CLS] Gram-negative Halomonas spp. [CLS] , Vibrio spp. and Proteus spp., and bacteria of the Enterobacteriaceae family have been reported to occur on cheese surfaces [14, 15, 25, 34, 35, 41, 50].\n The presence"]]
["bb_train_293", [" acid tolerant bacterial microbiota, primarily Gram-positive coryneforms (Brevibacterium spp., Corynebacterium spp. and Microbacterium spp.) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and Gram-negative Halomonas spp.,  [CLS] Vibrio spp. and Proteus spp., and bacteria of the Enterobacteriaceae family have been reported to occur on cheese surfaces [CLS]  [14, 15, 25, 34, 35, 41, 50].\n The presence of Gram-negative bacteria was first hypothesised to be \nindicative of hygienic problems. However, more recent results have shown", " acid tolerant bacterial microbiota, primarily Gram-positive coryneforms (Brevibacterium spp., Corynebacterium spp. and Microbacterium spp.) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and Gram-negative Halomonas spp.,  [CLS] Vibrio spp. and Proteus spp., and bacteria of the Enterobacteriaceae family have been reported to occur on cheese surfaces [14, 15, 25, 34, 35, 41, 50].\n The presence of Gram-negative bacteria was first hypothesised to be \nindicative of hygienic problems. However, more recent results have shown\n that they produce important cheese flavour compounds and thus might \ncontribute positively to the cheese [CLS]  ripening process [11].\n", " acid tolerant bacterial microbiota, primarily Gram-positive coryneforms (Brevibacterium spp., Corynebacterium spp. and Microbacterium spp.) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and Gram-negative Halomonas spp.,  [CLS] Vibrio spp. and Proteus spp., and bacteria of the Enterobacteriaceae family have been reported to occur on cheese surfaces [14, 15, 25, 34, 35, 41, 50].\n The presence of Gram-negative bacteria was first hypothesised to be \nindicative of hygienic problems. However, more recent results have shown\n that they produce important cheese [CLS]  flavour compounds and thus might \ncontribute positively to the cheese ripening process [11].\n"]]
["bb_train_294", [" of the less acid tolerant bacterial microbiota, primarily Gram-positive coryneforms (Brevibacterium spp., Corynebacterium spp. and Microbacterium spp.) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and  [CLS] Gram-negative Halomonas spp., Vibrio spp. [CLS]  and Proteus spp., and bacteria of the Enterobacteriaceae family have been reported to occur on cheese surfaces [14, 15, 25, 34, 35, 41, 50].\n The presence of Gram-negative"]]
["bb_train_295", [" microbiota, primarily Gram-positive coryneforms (Brevibacterium spp., Corynebacterium spp. and Microbacterium spp.) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and Gram-negative Halomonas spp., Vibrio spp. and  [CLS] Proteus spp., and bacteria of the Enterobacteriaceae family have been reported to occur on cheese surfaces [14, 15, 25, 34, 35, 41, 50].\n The presence of Gram-negative bacteria was first hypothesised to be \nindicative of hygienic problems. However, more recent results have shown\n that they produce important cheese [CLS]  flavour compounds and thus might \ncontribute positively to the cheese ripening process [11].\n", " microbiota, primarily Gram-positive coryneforms (Brevibacterium spp., Corynebacterium spp. and Microbacterium spp.) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and Gram-negative Halomonas spp., Vibrio spp. and  [CLS] Proteus spp., and bacteria of the Enterobacteriaceae family have been reported to occur on cheese surfaces [14, 15, 25, 34, 35, 41, 50].\n The presence of Gram-negative bacteria was first hypothesised to be \nindicative of hygienic problems. However, more recent results have shown\n that they produce important cheese flavour compounds and thus might \ncontribute positively to the cheese [CLS]  ripening process [11].\n", " microbiota, primarily Gram-positive coryneforms (Brevibacterium spp., Corynebacterium spp. and Microbacterium spp.) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and Gram-negative Halomonas spp., Vibrio spp. and  [CLS] Proteus spp., and bacteria of the Enterobacteriaceae family have been reported to occur on cheese surfaces [CLS]  [14, 15, 25, 34, 35, 41, 50].\n The presence of Gram-negative bacteria was first hypothesised to be \nindicative of hygienic problems. However, more recent results have shown"]]
["bb_train_296", [" of the less acid tolerant bacterial microbiota, primarily Gram-positive coryneforms (Brevibacterium spp., Corynebacterium spp. and Microbacterium spp.) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and  [CLS] Gram-negative Halomonas spp., Vibrio spp. and Proteus spp. [CLS] , and bacteria of the Enterobacteriaceae family have been reported to occur on cheese surfaces [14, 15, 25, 34, 35, 41, 50].\n The presence of Gram-negative bacteria was first"]]
["bb_train_297", [" Corynebacterium spp. and Microbacterium spp.) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and Gram-negative Halomonas spp., Vibrio spp. and Proteus spp., and bacteria of the  [CLS] Enterobacteriaceae family have been reported to occur on cheese surfaces [14, 15, 25, 34, 35, 41, 50].\n The presence of Gram-negative bacteria was first hypothesised to be \nindicative of hygienic problems. However, more recent results have shown\n that they produce important cheese [CLS]  flavour compounds and thus might \ncontribute positively to the cheese ripening process [11].\n", " Corynebacterium spp. and Microbacterium spp.) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and Gram-negative Halomonas spp., Vibrio spp. and Proteus spp., and bacteria of the  [CLS] Enterobacteriaceae family have been reported to occur on cheese surfaces [14, 15, 25, 34, 35, 41, 50].\n The presence of Gram-negative bacteria was first hypothesised to be \nindicative of hygienic problems. However, more recent results have shown\n that they produce important cheese flavour compounds and thus might \ncontribute positively to the cheese [CLS]  ripening process [11].\n", " Corynebacterium spp. and Microbacterium spp.) [4]. In addition, subpopulations of bacteria such as Gram-positive Marinilactibacillus spp. and Gram-negative Halomonas spp., Vibrio spp. and Proteus spp., and bacteria of the  [CLS] Enterobacteriaceae family have been reported to occur on cheese surfaces [CLS]  [14, 15, 25, 34, 35, 41, 50].\n The presence of Gram-negative bacteria was first hypothesised to be \nindicative of hygienic problems. However, more recent results have shown"]]
["bb_train_298", [" [CLS] cheeses \nfrom dairies A and C were primarily dominated by the LAB starter \ncultures Leuconostoc mesenteroides [CLS]  and Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis (Table 3). Furthermore, the cheeses from dairies A and C were dominated by the non-starter lactic acid bacteria (NSLAB) Lactobacillus paracasei, and for the", " [CLS] starter \ncultures Leuconostoc mesenteroides [CLS]  and Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis (Table 3). Furthermore, the cheeses from dairies A and C were dominated by the non-starter lactic acid bacteria (NSLAB) Lactobacillus paracasei, and for the", " [CLS] cheeses \nfrom dairies A and C were primarily dominated by the LAB starter \ncultures Leuconostoc mesenteroides [CLS]  and Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis (Table 3). Furthermore, the cheeses from dairies A and C were dominated by the non-starter lactic acid bacteria (NSLAB) Lactobacillus paracasei, and for the"]]
["bb_train_299", [" [CLS] LAB starter \ncultures Leuconostoc mesenteroides [CLS]  and Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis (Table 3). Furthermore, the cheeses from dairies A and C were dominated by the non-starter lactic acid bacteria (NSLAB) Lactobacillus paracasei, and for the"]]
["bb_train_300", [" [CLS] cheeses from dairies A and C were dominated by the non-starter lactic acid bacteria (NSLAB) Lactobacillus paracasei [CLS] , and for the cheese from dairy A, a minor group consisting of the NSLAB Lb. parabuchneri\n was found. The interior bacterial isolates from the cheeses from \ndairies", " [CLS] cheeses from dairies A and C were dominated by the non-starter lactic acid bacteria (NSLAB) Lactobacillus paracasei [CLS] , and for the cheese from dairy A, a minor group consisting of the NSLAB Lb. parabuchneri\n was found. The interior bacterial isolates from the cheeses from \ndairies", " \nnot found in the cheeses at the end of ripening, even though it was \nadded as a part of the primary LAB starter culture. Contrary, the NSLAB  [CLS] Lactobacillus paracasei was found in three out of four cheeses [CLS] . This confirms the findings by Antonsson et al. [1], who found Lb. paracasei to be the main NSLAB in several Danbo cheeses.\n", " [CLS] Lactobacillus paracasei\n higher survival during gastrointestinal [CLS]  passage or technological \nprocess conditions.\n"]]
["bb_train_301", [" dominated by the LAB starter \ncultures Leuconostoc mesenteroides and Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis (Table 3). Furthermore, the cheeses from dairies A and C were dominated by the non-starter  [CLS] lactic acid bacteria (NSLAB) Lactobacillus paracasei [CLS] , and for the cheese from dairy A, a minor group consisting of the NSLAB Lb. parabuchneri\n was found. The interior bacterial isolates from the cheeses from \ndairies", " generally \nnot found in the cheeses at the end of ripening, even though it was \nadded as a part of the primary LAB starter culture. Contrary, the  [CLS] NSLAB Lactobacillus paracasei [CLS]  was found in three out of four cheeses. This confirms the findings by Antonsson et al. [1], who found Lb. paracasei to be the main NSLAB in several Danbo"]]
["bb_train_302", [" and Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis (Table 3). Furthermore, the cheeses from dairies A and C were dominated by the non-starter lactic acid bacteria (NSLAB) Lactobacillus paracasei, and for the  [CLS] cheese from dairy A, a minor group consisting of the NSLAB Lb. parabuchneri [CLS] \n was found. The interior bacterial isolates from the cheeses from \ndairies B and D were primarily dominated by NSLAB. The cheese from dairy\n B was dominated"]]
["bb_train_303", [" from dairies A and C were dominated by the non-starter lactic acid bacteria (NSLAB) Lactobacillus paracasei, and for the cheese from dairy A, a minor group consisting of the  [CLS] NSLAB Lb. parabuchneri [CLS] \n was found. The interior bacterial isolates from the cheeses from \ndairies B and D were primarily dominated by NSLAB. The cheese from dairy\n B was dominated"]]
["bb_train_304", [" group consisting of the NSLAB Lb. parabuchneri\n was found. The interior bacterial isolates from the cheeses from \ndairies B and D were primarily dominated by NSLAB. The  [CLS] cheese from dairy\n B was dominated by a range of NSLAB including Lb. brevis [CLS] , Lb. oligofermentans and Lb. farminis, whereas the cheese from dairy D was exclusively dominated by the NSLAB Lb. paracasei. Additionally, minor groups of the LAB starter cultures Lc. lactis"]]
["bb_train_305", [" interior bacterial isolates from the cheeses from \ndairies B and D were primarily dominated by NSLAB. The cheese from dairy\n B was dominated by a range of  [CLS] NSLAB including Lb. brevis [CLS] , Lb. oligofermentans and Lb. farminis, whereas the cheese from dairy D was exclusively dominated by the NSLAB Lb. paracasei. Additionally, minor groups of the LAB starter cultures Lc. lactis"]]
["bb_train_306", [" group consisting of the NSLAB Lb. parabuchneri\n was found. The interior bacterial isolates from the cheeses from \ndairies B and D were primarily dominated by NSLAB. The  [CLS] cheese from dairy\n B was dominated by a range of NSLAB including Lb. brevis, Lb. oligofermentans [CLS]  and Lb. farminis, whereas the cheese from dairy D was exclusively dominated by the NSLAB Lb. paracasei. Additionally, minor groups of the LAB starter cultures Lc. lactis subsp. lactis"]]
["bb_train_307", [" interior bacterial isolates from the cheeses from \ndairies B and D were primarily dominated by NSLAB. The cheese from dairy\n B was dominated by a range of  [CLS] NSLAB including Lb. brevis, Lb. oligofermentans [CLS]  and Lb. farminis, whereas the cheese from dairy D was exclusively dominated by the NSLAB Lb. paracasei. Additionally, minor groups of the LAB starter cultures Lc. lactis subsp. lactis"]]
["bb_train_308", [" group consisting of the NSLAB Lb. parabuchneri\n was found. The interior bacterial isolates from the cheeses from \ndairies B and D were primarily dominated by NSLAB. The  [CLS] cheese from dairy\n B was dominated by a range of NSLAB including Lb. brevis, Lb. oligofermentans and Lb. farminis [CLS] , whereas the cheese from dairy D was exclusively dominated by the NSLAB Lb. paracasei. Additionally, minor groups of the LAB starter cultures Lc. lactis subsp. lactis and Lc. lactis"]]
["bb_train_309", [" interior bacterial isolates from the cheeses from \ndairies B and D were primarily dominated by NSLAB. The cheese from dairy\n B was dominated by a range of  [CLS] NSLAB including Lb. brevis, Lb. oligofermentans and Lb. farminis [CLS] , whereas the cheese from dairy D was exclusively dominated by the NSLAB Lb. paracasei. Additionally, minor groups of the LAB starter cultures Lc. lactis subsp. lactis and Lc. lactis"]]
["bb_train_310", [" dairy\n B was dominated by a range of NSLAB including Lb. brevis, Lb. oligofermentans and Lb. farminis, whereas the cheese from dairy D was exclusively dominated by the  [CLS] NSLAB Lb. paracasei [CLS] . Additionally, minor groups of the LAB starter cultures Lc. lactis subsp. lactis and Lc. lactis subsp. cremoris were found on the cheeses from dairies B and D, respectively.\n", " the primary LAB starter culture. Contrary, the NSLAB Lactobacillus paracasei was found in three out of four cheeses. This confirms the findings by Antonsson et al. [1], who found  [CLS] Lb. paracasei to be the main NSLAB [CLS]  in several Danbo cheeses.\n"]]
["bb_train_311", [" Lb. brevis, Lb. oligofermentans and Lb. farminis, whereas the cheese from dairy D was exclusively dominated by the NSLAB Lb. paracasei. Additionally, minor groups of the LAB starter cultures  [CLS] Lc. lactis subsp. lactis and Lc. lactis subsp. cremoris were found on the cheeses from dairies B [CLS]  and D, respectively.\n", " NSLAB including Lb. brevis, Lb. oligofermentans and Lb. farminis, whereas the cheese from dairy D was exclusively dominated by the NSLAB Lb. paracasei. Additionally, minor groups of the LAB  [CLS] starter cultures Lc. lactis subsp. lactis [CLS]  and Lc. lactis subsp. cremoris were found on the cheeses from dairies B and D, respectively.\n"]]
["bb_train_312", [" of NSLAB including Lb. brevis, Lb. oligofermentans and Lb. farminis, whereas the cheese from dairy D was exclusively dominated by the NSLAB Lb. paracasei. Additionally, minor groups of the  [CLS] LAB starter cultures Lc. lactis subsp. lactis [CLS]  and Lc. lactis subsp. cremoris were found on the cheeses from dairies B and D, respectively.\n"]]
["bb_train_313", [" NSLAB including Lb. brevis, Lb. oligofermentans and Lb. farminis, whereas the cheese from dairy D was exclusively dominated by the NSLAB Lb. paracasei. Additionally, minor groups of the LAB  [CLS] starter cultures Lc. lactis subsp. lactis and Lc. lactis subsp. cremoris [CLS]  were found on the cheeses from dairies B and D, respectively.\n", " Lb. farminis, whereas the cheese from dairy D was exclusively dominated by the NSLAB Lb. paracasei. Additionally, minor groups of the LAB starter cultures Lc. lactis subsp. lactis and  [CLS] Lc. lactis subsp. cremoris were found on the cheeses from dairies B and D [CLS] , respectively.\n", " [CLS] cheese than Lc. lactis subsp. cremoris [CLS]  [8].\n This fact even though not examined in the present study suggests that \nthe level of autolysis of the latter is the highest and thus explains ", "\n This fact even though not examined in the present study suggests that \nthe level of autolysis of the latter is the highest and thus explains \nwhy  [CLS] Lc. lactis subsp. cremoris was generally \nnot found in the cheeses at the end of ripening, even though it was \nadded as a part of the primary LAB starter culture [CLS] . Contrary, the NSLAB Lactobacillus paracasei was found in three out of four cheeses. This confirms the findings by Antonsson et al. [1], who found Lb. paracasei to be the"]]
["bb_train_314", [" of NSLAB including Lb. brevis, Lb. oligofermentans and Lb. farminis, whereas the cheese from dairy D was exclusively dominated by the NSLAB Lb. paracasei. Additionally, minor groups of the  [CLS] LAB starter cultures Lc. lactis subsp. lactis and Lc. lactis subsp. cremoris [CLS]  were found on the cheeses from dairies B and D, respectively.\n", "\n This fact even though not examined in the present study suggests that \nthe level of autolysis of the latter is the highest and thus explains \nwhy  [CLS] Lc. lactis subsp. cremoris was generally \nnot found in the cheeses at the end of ripening, even though it was \nadded as a part of the primary LAB [CLS]  starter culture. Contrary, the NSLAB Lactobacillus paracasei was found in three out of four cheeses. This confirms the findings by Antonsson et al. [1], who found Lb. paracasei to"]]
["bb_train_315", [" [CLS] Gram-positive Actinobacteria [CLS]  with Corynebacterium casei and/or C. variabile as the predominant (Table 4). Additionally, the cheese from dairy A was dominated by high of numbers of Brachybacterium alimentarum. Various Brevibacterium species"]]
["bb_train_316", [" [CLS] Gram-positive Actinobacteria with Corynebacterium casei [CLS]  and/or C. variabile as the predominant (Table 4). Additionally, the cheese from dairy A was dominated by high of numbers of Brachybacterium alimentarum. Various Brevibacterium species were found on"]]
["bb_train_317", [" [CLS] Gram-positive Actinobacteria with Corynebacterium casei and/or C. variabile [CLS]  as the predominant (Table 4). Additionally, the cheese from dairy A was dominated by high of numbers of Brachybacterium alimentarum. Various Brevibacterium species were found on the cheeses from"]]
["bb_train_318", [" [CLS] cheese from dairy A was dominated by high of numbers of Brachybacterium alimentarum [CLS] . Various Brevibacterium species were found on the cheeses from the farmhouses (dairies A, B and C). B. permense was found on the cheese from dairy A, B. linens was"]]
["bb_train_319", [" Gram-positive Actinobacteria with Corynebacterium casei and/or C. variabile as the predominant (Table 4). Additionally, the cheese from dairy A was dominated by high of numbers of Brachybacterium alimentarum. Various  [CLS] Brevibacterium species were found on the cheeses from the farmhouses [CLS]  (dairies A, B and C). B. permense was found on the cheese from dairy A, B. linens was found on the cheese from dairy B and B. aurantiacum was"]]
["bb_train_320", [" cheese from dairy A was dominated by high of numbers of Brachybacterium alimentarum. Various Brevibacterium species were found on the cheeses from the farmhouses (dairies A, B and C).  [CLS] B. permense was found on the cheese from dairy A [CLS] , B. linens was found on the cheese from dairy B and B. aurantiacum was found on the cheese from dairy C. Brevibacterium\n spp. could not be isolated on", " on the cheeses from dairies B and C, respectively, have been used\n for a long time as ripening cultures by the dairy industry [16], whereas the soil bacteria  [CLS] B. permense found on the cheese from dairy A [CLS] , to our knowledge, has not previously been found on cheese.Several studies have now shown that Corynebacterium spp. is the most dominant bacterial species on surface-ripened cheeses [3, 6, 34].", "\n found on the cheeses from dairies B and C, respectively, have been used\n for a long time as ripening cultures by the dairy industry [16], whereas the  [CLS] soil bacteria B. permense [CLS]  found on the cheese from dairy A, to our knowledge, has not previously been found on cheese.Several studies have now shown that Corynebacterium spp. is the most dominant bacterial"]]
["bb_train_321", [" from the farmhouses (dairies A, B and C). B. permense was found on the cheese from dairy A, B. linens was found on the cheese from dairy B and  [CLS] B. aurantiacum was found on the cheese from dairy C [CLS] . Brevibacterium\n spp. could not be isolated on the cheese from dairy D. Furthermore, a \nnumber of coagulase negative staphylococci were found, i.e., Staphylococcus saprophyticus on the cheeses", " with cheese surfaces [13, 28, 49]. In the present study, various Brevibacterium spp. were found on the cheeses from the farmhouses (dairies A, B and C). B. linens and  [CLS] B. aurantiacum,\n found on the cheeses from dairies B and C [CLS] , respectively, have been used\n for a long time as ripening cultures by the dairy industry [16], whereas the soil bacteria B. permense found on the cheese from dairy", " with cheese surfaces [13, 28, 49]. In the present study, various Brevibacterium spp. were found on the cheeses from the farmhouses (dairies A, B and C). B. linens and  [CLS] B. aurantiacum,\n found on the cheeses from dairies B and C, respectively, have been used\n for a long time as ripening cultures [CLS]  by the dairy industry [16], whereas the soil bacteria B. permense found on the cheese from dairy A, to our knowledge, has not previously been found on cheese.Several studies", " with cheese surfaces [13, 28, 49]. In the present study, various Brevibacterium spp. were found on the cheeses from the farmhouses (dairies A, B and C). B. linens and  [CLS] B. aurantiacum,\n found on the cheeses from dairies B [CLS]  and C, respectively, have been used\n for a long time as ripening cultures by the dairy industry [16], whereas the soil bacteria B. permense found on the cheese"]]
["bb_train_322", [" the cheese from dairy C. Brevibacterium\n spp. could not be isolated on the cheese from dairy D. Furthermore, a \nnumber of coagulase negative staphylococci were found, i.e.,  [CLS] Staphylococcus saprophyticus on the cheeses from dairies B and D [CLS] , and Staph. equorum on the cheeses from dairies C and D. Finally, a number of Gram-negative bacteria species including Proteus vulgaris and Alcaligenes faecalis was found on the cheese", " the cheese from dairy C. Brevibacterium\n spp. could not be isolated on the cheese from dairy D. Furthermore, a \nnumber of coagulase negative staphylococci were found, i.e.,  [CLS] Staphylococcus saprophyticus on the cheeses from dairies B [CLS]  and D, and Staph. equorum on the cheeses from dairies C and D. Finally, a number of Gram-negative bacteria species including Proteus vulgaris and Alcaligenes faecalis was found on"]]
["bb_train_323", [" and B. aurantiacum was found on the cheese from dairy C. Brevibacterium\n spp. could not be isolated on the cheese from dairy D. Furthermore, a \nnumber of  [CLS] coagulase negative staphylococci were found, i.e., Staphylococcus saprophyticus [CLS]  on the cheeses from dairies B and D, and Staph. equorum on the cheeses from dairies C and D. Finally, a number of Gram-negative bacteria species including Proteus vulgaris"]]
["bb_train_324", [" isolated on the cheese from dairy D. Furthermore, a \nnumber of coagulase negative staphylococci were found, i.e., Staphylococcus saprophyticus on the cheeses from dairies B and D, and  [CLS] Staph. equorum on the cheeses from dairies C and D [CLS] . Finally, a number of Gram-negative bacteria species including Proteus vulgaris and Alcaligenes faecalis was found on the cheese from dairy C.Figure 3\n shows the grouping of the surface", " isolated on the cheese from dairy D. Furthermore, a \nnumber of coagulase negative staphylococci were found, i.e., Staphylococcus saprophyticus on the cheeses from dairies B and D, and  [CLS] Staph. equorum on the cheeses from dairies C [CLS]  and D. Finally, a number of Gram-negative bacteria species including Proteus vulgaris and Alcaligenes faecalis was found on the cheese from dairy C.Figure 3\n shows the grouping of"]]
["bb_train_325", [" and B. aurantiacum was found on the cheese from dairy C. Brevibacterium\n spp. could not be isolated on the cheese from dairy D. Furthermore, a \nnumber of  [CLS] coagulase negative staphylococci were found, i.e., Staphylococcus saprophyticus on the cheeses from dairies B and D, and Staph. equorum [CLS]  on the cheeses from dairies C and D. Finally, a number of Gram-negative bacteria species including Proteus vulgaris and Alcaligenes faecalis was found on the cheese from dairy C.Figure"]]
["bb_train_326", [" the cheeses from dairies B and D, and Staph. equorum on the cheeses from dairies C and D. Finally, a number of Gram-negative bacteria species including Proteus vulgaris and  [CLS] Alcaligenes faecalis was found on the cheese from dairy C [CLS] .Figure 3\n shows the grouping of the surface yeast microbiota. The yeast surface \nmicrobiota on the three farmhouse cheeses consisted of two to four \ngroups, whereas the", " [CLS] Gram-negative bacterial microbiota consisting of Proteus vulgaris and Alcaligenes faecalis [CLS]  was found on cheese from dairy C. A previous study has focused on P. vulgaris as cheese ripening culture [11]. P. vulgaris\n was found to produce important flavour", " [CLS] Alcaligenes faecalis was found on cheese from dairy C [CLS] . A previous study has focused on P. vulgaris as cheese ripening culture [11]. P. vulgaris\n was found to produce important flavour notes including aldehydes and \nacids, but"]]
["bb_train_327", [" staphylococci were found, i.e., Staphylococcus saprophyticus on the cheeses from dairies B and D, and Staph. equorum on the cheeses from dairies C and D. Finally, a number of  [CLS] Gram-negative bacteria species including Proteus vulgaris and Alcaligenes faecalis [CLS]  was found on the cheese from dairy C.Figure 3\n shows the grouping of the surface yeast microbiota. The yeast surface \nmicrobiota on the three farmhouse cheeses consisted", " [CLS] Gram-negative bacterial microbiota consisting of Proteus vulgaris and Alcaligenes faecalis [CLS]  was found on cheese from dairy C. A previous study has focused on P. vulgaris as cheese ripening culture [11]. P. vulgaris\n was found to produce important flavour"]]
["bb_train_328", [" the three farmhouse cheeses consisted of two to four \ngroups, whereas the cheese produced at the industrial dairy (dairy D) \nconsisted of only one single group. The  [CLS] cheese from dairy A was equally \ndominated by Yarrowia lipolytica and Scopulariopsis brevicaulis [CLS] . The yeast microbiota on cheese from dairy B was primarily dominated by Geotrichum spp., however, Kluyveromyces marxianus and Debaryomyces hansenii were additionally found in minor amounts. The cheese from", " [CLS] Scopulariopsis brevicaulis was found in a high number on cheese [CLS]  A. S. brevicaulis has previously been found in Danish cheese [52],\n and has been subject to spoilage of cheeses due to its high proteolytic\n activity resulting in"]]
["bb_train_329", [" at the industrial dairy (dairy D) \nconsisted of only one single group. The cheese from dairy A was equally \ndominated by Yarrowia lipolytica and Scopulariopsis brevicaulis. The  [CLS] yeast microbiota on cheese from dairy B was primarily dominated by Geotrichum spp., however, Kluyveromyces marxianus [CLS]  and Debaryomyces hansenii were additionally found in minor amounts. The cheese from dairy C was dominated by D. hansenii followed by a minor group of Geothrichum spp. Finally, the", " dairy (dairy D) \nconsisted of only one single group. The cheese from dairy A was equally \ndominated by Yarrowia lipolytica and Scopulariopsis brevicaulis. The yeast microbiota on  [CLS] cheese from dairy B was primarily dominated by Geotrichum spp., however, Kluyveromyces marxianus [CLS]  and Debaryomyces hansenii were additionally found in minor amounts. The cheese from dairy C was dominated by D. hansenii followed by a minor group of Geothrichum spp. Finally, the"]]
["bb_train_330", [" Scopulariopsis brevicaulis. The yeast microbiota on cheese from dairy B was primarily dominated by Geotrichum spp., however, Kluyveromyces marxianus and Debaryomyces hansenii were additionally found in minor amounts. The  [CLS] cheese from dairy C was dominated by D. hansenii followed by a minor group of Geothrichum spp. [CLS]  Finally, the cheese from dairy D was entirely dominated by D. hansenii.\n"]]
["bb_train_331", [" [CLS] Brevibacterium linens was found to be subdominant compared to other bacteria on the farmhouse cheeses [CLS] , and no Brevibacterium\n spp. was found on the cheese from the industrial dairy.\n"]]
["bb_train_332", [" [CLS] P. vulgaris as cheese ripening culture [CLS]  [11]. P. vulgaris\n was found to produce important flavour notes including aldehydes and \nacids, but influenced other surface-ripening cultures negatively. A. faecalis, which is found in soil,", " bacterial microbiota consisting of Proteus vulgaris and Alcaligenes faecalis was found on cheese from dairy C. A previous study has focused on P. vulgaris as cheese ripening culture [11].  [CLS] P. vulgaris\n was found to produce important flavour notes including aldehydes and \nacids, but influenced other surface-ripening cultures [CLS]  negatively. A. faecalis, which is found in soil, water, and environments in association with humans and generally considered non-pathogenic [19], has also previously been found on Livarot cheese [30].The"]]
["bb_train_333", [" on P. vulgaris as cheese ripening culture [11]. P. vulgaris\n was found to produce important flavour notes including aldehydes and \nacids, but influenced other surface-ripening cultures negatively.  [CLS] A. faecalis, which is found in soil, water [CLS] , and environments in association with humans and generally considered non-pathogenic [19], has also previously been found on Livarot cheese [30].The present study confirms the presence of the marine bacteria", " on P. vulgaris as cheese ripening culture [11]. P. vulgaris\n was found to produce important flavour notes including aldehydes and \nacids, but influenced other surface-ripening cultures negatively.  [CLS] A. faecalis, which is found in soil [CLS] , water, and environments in association with humans and generally considered non-pathogenic [19], has also previously been found on Livarot cheese [30].The present study confirms the presence of the marine", " on P. vulgaris as cheese ripening culture [11]. P. vulgaris\n was found to produce important flavour notes including aldehydes and \nacids, but influenced other surface-ripening cultures negatively.  [CLS] A. faecalis, which is found in soil, water, and environments in association with humans [CLS]  and generally considered non-pathogenic [19], has also previously been found on Livarot cheese [30].The present study confirms the presence of the marine bacteria Marinilactibacillus psychrotolerans\n on cheese as", " on P. vulgaris as cheese ripening culture [11]. P. vulgaris\n was found to produce important flavour notes including aldehydes and \nacids, but influenced other surface-ripening cultures negatively.  [CLS] A. faecalis, which is found in soil, water, and environments in association with humans and generally considered non-pathogenic [19], has also previously been found on Livarot cheese [CLS]  [30].The present study confirms the presence of the marine bacteria Marinilactibacillus psychrotolerans\n on cheese as this species was found on the surface of cheese D. Both \nFrench"]]
["bb_train_334", [" on P. vulgaris as cheese ripening culture [11]. P. vulgaris\n was found to produce important flavour notes including aldehydes and \nacids, but influenced other surface-ripening cultures negatively.  [CLS] A. faecalis, which is found in soil, water, and environments in association with humans and generally considered non-pathogenic [CLS]  [19], has also previously been found on Livarot cheese [30].The present study confirms the presence of the marine bacteria Marinilactibacillus psychrotolerans\n on cheese as this species was found"]]
["bb_train_335", [" and environments in association with humans and generally considered non-pathogenic [19], has also previously been found on Livarot cheese [30].The present study confirms the presence of the marine bacteria  [CLS] Marinilactibacillus psychrotolerans\n on cheese [CLS]  as this species was found on the surface of cheese D. Both \nFrench and German cheeses have previously been reported to contain M. psychrotolerans [14, 34]. It was", " and environments in association with humans and generally considered non-pathogenic [19], has also previously been found on Livarot cheese [30].The present study confirms the presence of the marine bacteria  [CLS] Marinilactibacillus psychrotolerans\n on cheese as this species was found on the surface of cheese D [CLS] . Both \nFrench and German cheeses have previously been reported to contain M. psychrotolerans [14, 34]. It was suggested that M. psychrotolerans\n is transferred to the cheeses from", " soil, water, and environments in association with humans and generally considered non-pathogenic [19], has also previously been found on Livarot cheese [30].The present study confirms the presence of the  [CLS] marine bacteria Marinilactibacillus psychrotolerans [CLS] \n on cheese as this species was found on the surface of cheese D. Both \nFrench and German cheeses have previously been reported to contain M. psychrotolerans [14,", " and environments in association with humans and generally considered non-pathogenic [19], has also previously been found on Livarot cheese [30].The present study confirms the presence of the marine bacteria  [CLS] Marinilactibacillus psychrotolerans\n on cheese as this species was found on the surface of cheese [CLS]  D. Both \nFrench and German cheeses have previously been reported to contain M. psychrotolerans [14, 34]. It was suggested that M. psychrotolerans\n is transferred to the cheeses", " lactic acid bacterium. Strains related to other reference strains sequenced in the present study, such as Psychrobacter aquimaris, Brachybacterium tyrofermentans, Corynebacterium ammoniagenes, Brevibacterium antiquum, Microbacterium gubbeenense, Brochothrix thermosphacta and  [CLS] Marinilactibacillus psychrotolerans, were also present in the cheeses [CLS]  (>80% perfect match reads, see Additional file 14: Table S8).\n"]]
["bb_train_336", [" present study confirms the presence of the marine bacteria Marinilactibacillus psychrotolerans\n on cheese as this species was found on the surface of cheese D. Both \nFrench and  [CLS] German cheeses have previously been reported to contain M. psychrotolerans [CLS]  [14, 34]. It was suggested that M. psychrotolerans\n is transferred to the cheeses from the marine environments via sea \nsalt.\n", " cheese [30].The present study confirms the presence of the marine bacteria Marinilactibacillus psychrotolerans\n on cheese as this species was found on the surface of cheese D. Both \n [CLS] French and German cheeses have previously been reported to contain M. psychrotolerans [CLS]  [14, 34]. It was suggested that M. psychrotolerans\n is transferred to the cheeses from the marine environments via sea \nsalt.\n", " species was found on the surface of cheese D. Both \nFrench and German cheeses have previously been reported to contain M. psychrotolerans [14, 34]. It was suggested that  [CLS] M. psychrotolerans\n is transferred to the cheeses from the marine environments [CLS]  via sea \nsalt.\n", " species was found on the surface of cheese D. Both \nFrench and German cheeses have previously been reported to contain M. psychrotolerans [14, 34]. It was suggested that  [CLS] M. psychrotolerans\n is transferred to the cheeses [CLS]  from the marine environments via sea \nsalt.\n", " species was found on the surface of cheese D. Both \nFrench and German cheeses have previously been reported to contain M. psychrotolerans [14, 34]. It was suggested that  [CLS] M. psychrotolerans\n is transferred to the cheeses from the marine environments via sea \nsalt [CLS] .\n"]]
["bb_train_337", [" [CLS] filamentous fungus Scopulariopsis brevicaulis [CLS]  was found in a high number on cheese A. S. brevicaulis has previously been found in Danish cheese [52],\n and has been subject to spoilage of cheeses due"]]
["bb_train_338", [" [CLS] S. brevicaulis has previously been found in Danish cheese [52],\n and has been subject to spoilage of cheeses [CLS]  due to its high proteolytic\n activity resulting in ammonia production and its production of \narsenical compounds, e.g., diethylarsine, which has a very \ncharacteristic garlic-like odour [5].", " [CLS] S. brevicaulis has previously been found in Danish cheese [CLS]  [52],\n and has been subject to spoilage of cheeses due to its high proteolytic\n activity resulting in ammonia production and its production of \narsenical compounds, e.g.,"]]
["bb_train_339", [" [CLS] S. brevicaulis has previously been found in Danish cheese [52],\n and has been subject to spoilage of cheeses due to its high proteolytic\n activity [CLS]  resulting in ammonia production and its production of \narsenical compounds, e.g., diethylarsine, which has a very \ncharacteristic garlic-like odour [5].\n", " [CLS] S. brevicaulis has previously been found in Danish cheese [52],\n and has been subject to spoilage of cheeses due to its high proteolytic\n activity resulting in ammonia production [CLS]  and its production of \narsenical compounds, e.g., diethylarsine, which has a very \ncharacteristic garlic-like odour [5].\n", " [CLS] S. brevicaulis has previously been found in Danish cheese [52],\n and has been subject to spoilage of cheeses due to its high proteolytic\n activity resulting in ammonia production and its production of \narsenical compounds [CLS] , e.g., diethylarsine, which has a very \ncharacteristic garlic-like odour [5].\n"]]
["bb_train_340", [" [CLS] Str. thermophilus in cheese [CLS]  interiors as well as Vagococcus carniphilus, Psychrobacter spp. and Lb. curvatus\n on cheese surfaces.\n", " [CLS] Str. thermophilus in cheese interiors [CLS]  as well as Vagococcus carniphilus, Psychrobacter spp. and Lb. curvatus\n on cheese surfaces.\n"]]
["bb_train_341", [" [CLS] Enterococcus faecalis (~\u2212 0.5 log from day 1) and promoted Lactobacillus plantarum\n growth (+ 0.2 to 0.5 log from day 8) in cheese [CLS] . They produced \nsmall amounts of putrescine (~ 1.3 mmol/kg) and cadaverine \n(~ 0.9 mmol/kg) in cheese after 28 days, and did not \naffect levels of volatile", " [CLS] Enterococcus faecalis,\n Enterococcus faecium, Macrococcus caseolyticus and Hafnia alvei reduced STEC O26:H11 counts by 1.4\u20132.5 log cfu g\u22121\n and to a lesser extent STEC O157:H7 counts in pasteurized milk cheeses [CLS] .\n"]]
["bb_train_342", [" [CLS] Lactobacillus plantarum\n growth (+ 0.2 to 0.5 log from day 8) in cheese [CLS] . They produced \nsmall amounts of putrescine (~ 1.3 mmol/kg) and cadaverine \n(~ 0.9 mmol/kg) in cheese after 28 days, and did not \naffect levels of volatile", " [CLS] Lactobacillus plantarum and Lc. lactis\n was the most inhibitory: after inoculation of this consortium into \nmilk [CLS] , STEC O26:H11 and O157:H7, inoculated at \n2 log cfu ml\u22121, were reduced by up to 3 log cfu g\u22121 in ripened cheese.\n"]]
["bb_train_343", [" of \ncheese-associated bacteria. Using this extended dairy catalog, we \nrevealed the presence in traditional cheese of dominant microorganisms \nnot deliberately inoculated, mainly Gram-negative genera such as  [CLS] Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis or Psychrobacter immobilis, that may contribute to the characteristics of cheese produced through traditional methods [CLS] .\n", " combined with publicly available genome \nreferences, represents the most expansive catalog to date of \ncheese-associated bacteria. Using this extended dairy catalog, we \nrevealed the presence in  [CLS] traditional cheese of dominant microorganisms \nnot deliberately inoculated, mainly Gram-negative genera such as Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis [CLS]  or Psychrobacter immobilis, that may contribute to the characteristics of cheese produced through traditional methods.\n"]]
["bb_train_344", [" expansive catalog to date of \ncheese-associated bacteria. Using this extended dairy catalog, we \nrevealed the presence in traditional cheese of dominant microorganisms \nnot deliberately inoculated, mainly  [CLS] Gram-negative genera such as Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis [CLS]  or Psychrobacter immobilis, that may contribute to the characteristics of cheese produced through traditional methods.\n"]]
["bb_train_345", [" bacteria. Using this extended dairy catalog, we \nrevealed the presence in traditional cheese of dominant microorganisms \nnot deliberately inoculated, mainly Gram-negative genera such as Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis or  [CLS] Psychrobacter immobilis, that may contribute to the characteristics of cheese produced through traditional methods [CLS] .\n", " combined with publicly available genome \nreferences, represents the most expansive catalog to date of \ncheese-associated bacteria. Using this extended dairy catalog, we \nrevealed the presence in  [CLS] traditional cheese of dominant microorganisms \nnot deliberately inoculated, mainly Gram-negative genera such as Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis or Psychrobacter immobilis [CLS] , that may contribute to the characteristics of cheese produced through traditional methods.\n"]]
["bb_train_346", [" expansive catalog to date of \ncheese-associated bacteria. Using this extended dairy catalog, we \nrevealed the presence in traditional cheese of dominant microorganisms \nnot deliberately inoculated, mainly  [CLS] Gram-negative genera such as Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis or Psychrobacter immobilis [CLS] , that may contribute to the characteristics of cheese produced through traditional methods.\n"]]
["bb_train_347", [" [CLS] Corynebacterium casei, Microbacterium gubbeenense, Arthrobacter arilaitensis, Arthrobacter bergerei, Agrococcus casei, Mycetocola reblochoni and Vibrio casei appear to be endemic in the cheese habitat and the environment of cheese manufacturing [CLS]  [14\u201317].\n", " [CLS] Corynebacterium casei, Microbacterium gubbeenense, Arthrobacter arilaitensis, Arthrobacter bergerei, Agrococcus casei, Mycetocola reblochoni and Vibrio casei appear to be endemic in the cheese habitat [CLS]  and the environment of cheese manufacturing [14\u201317].\n"]]
["bb_train_348", [" [CLS] Microbacterium gubbeenense, Arthrobacter arilaitensis, Arthrobacter bergerei, Agrococcus casei, Mycetocola reblochoni and Vibrio casei appear to be endemic in the cheese habitat and the environment of cheese manufacturing [CLS]  [14\u201317].\n", " [CLS] Microbacterium gubbeenense, Arthrobacter arilaitensis, Arthrobacter bergerei, Agrococcus casei, Mycetocola reblochoni and Vibrio casei appear to be endemic in the cheese habitat [CLS]  and the environment of cheese manufacturing [14\u201317].\n", " Lactococcus lactis was the dominant lactic acid bacterium. Strains related to other reference strains sequenced in the present study, such as Psychrobacter aquimaris, Brachybacterium tyrofermentans, Corynebacterium ammoniagenes, Brevibacterium antiquum,  [CLS] Microbacterium gubbeenense, Brochothrix thermosphacta and Marinilactibacillus psychrotolerans, were also present in the cheeses [CLS]  (>80% perfect match reads, see Additional file 14: Table S8).\n"]]
["bb_train_349", [" [CLS] Arthrobacter arilaitensis, Arthrobacter bergerei, Agrococcus casei, Mycetocola reblochoni and Vibrio casei appear to be endemic in the cheese habitat and the environment of cheese manufacturing [CLS]  [14\u201317].\n", " [CLS] Arthrobacter arilaitensis, Arthrobacter bergerei, Agrococcus casei, Mycetocola reblochoni and Vibrio casei appear to be endemic in the cheese habitat [CLS]  and the environment of cheese manufacturing [14\u201317].\n"]]
["bb_train_350", [" [CLS] Arthrobacter bergerei, Agrococcus casei, Mycetocola reblochoni and Vibrio casei appear to be endemic in the cheese habitat [CLS]  and the environment of cheese manufacturing [14\u201317].\n", " [CLS] Arthrobacter bergerei, Agrococcus casei, Mycetocola reblochoni and Vibrio casei appear to be endemic in the cheese habitat and the environment of cheese manufacturing [CLS]  [14\u201317].\n"]]
["bb_train_351", [" [CLS] Agrococcus casei, Mycetocola reblochoni and Vibrio casei appear to be endemic in the cheese habitat [CLS]  and the environment of cheese manufacturing [14\u201317].\n", " [CLS] Agrococcus casei, Mycetocola reblochoni and Vibrio casei appear to be endemic in the cheese habitat and the environment of cheese manufacturing [CLS]  [14\u201317].\n"]]
["bb_train_352", [" [CLS] Mycetocola reblochoni and Vibrio casei appear to be endemic in the cheese habitat [CLS]  and the environment of cheese manufacturing [14\u201317].\n", " [CLS] Mycetocola reblochoni and Vibrio casei appear to be endemic in the cheese habitat and the environment of cheese manufacturing [CLS]  [14\u201317].\n"]]
["bb_train_353", [" [CLS] Vibrio casei appear to be endemic in the cheese habitat and the environment of cheese manufacturing [CLS]  [14\u201317].\n", " [CLS] Vibrio casei appear to be endemic in the cheese habitat [CLS]  and the environment of cheese manufacturing [14\u201317].\n"]]
["bb_train_354", [" [CLS] Arthrobacter are isolated from environments such as soil, where they are considered to be ubiquitous [CLS]  [41].\n Interestingly, the four cheese strains share several properties that \nmay be linked to adaptation to the cheese habitat, such as a cluster of \nfive genes"]]
["bb_train_355", [" the four cheese strains share several properties that \nmay be linked to adaptation to the cheese habitat, such as a cluster of \nfive genes involved in the  [CLS] catabolism of D-galactonate, as already \ndescribed in Arthrobacter arilaitensis Re117 [CLS]  [20].\n"]]
["bb_train_356", [" [CLS] Streptococcus infantarius\n isolated from Western African fermented milks [CLS] , sequenced in this work \n(3AG and 11FA), with those of the type strain isolated from infant feces\n (ATCC BAA-102), and of strain CJ18, isolated from Eastern African", " [CLS] Streptococcus infantarius\n isolated from Western African fermented milks, sequenced in this work \n(3AG and 11FA), with those of the type strain isolated from infant feces [CLS] \n (ATCC BAA-102), and of strain CJ18, isolated from Eastern African \nfermented milk. The four strains contain each 1900\u20132000 genes and share \n1567 genes.\n"]]
["bb_train_357", [" [CLS] Western African fermented milks, sequenced in this work \n(3AG [CLS]  and 11FA), with those of the type strain isolated from infant feces\n (ATCC BAA-102), and of strain CJ18, isolated from Eastern African \nfermented milk. The four strains"]]
["bb_train_358", [" [CLS] Western African fermented milks, sequenced in this work \n(3AG and 11FA [CLS] ), with those of the type strain isolated from infant feces\n (ATCC BAA-102), and of strain CJ18, isolated from Eastern African \nfermented milk. The four strains contain each"]]
["bb_train_359", [" of two strains of Streptococcus infantarius\n isolated from Western African fermented milks, sequenced in this work \n(3AG and 11FA), with those of the type strain isolated from  [CLS] infant feces\n (ATCC BAA-102 [CLS] ), and of strain CJ18, isolated from Eastern African \nfermented milk. The four strains contain each 1900\u20132000 genes and share \n1567 genes.\n"]]
["bb_train_360", [" from Western African fermented milks, sequenced in this work \n(3AG and 11FA), with those of the type strain isolated from infant feces\n (ATCC BAA-102), and of strain  [CLS] CJ18, isolated from Eastern African \nfermented milk [CLS] . The four strains contain each 1900\u20132000 genes and share \n1567 genes.\n"]]
["bb_train_361", [" [CLS] Streptococcus infantarius\n strains showed that these strains had acquired the ability to ferment \nlactose [CLS]  through the LacZS system, as previously described for Eastern \nAfrican strain CJ18 [42].\n"]]
["bb_train_362", [" [CLS] smear-ripened cheese E, the Arthrobacter arilaitensis GMPA29 [CLS]  reference genome was the most represented, as it corresponded to 19.8% of the total good quality reads, followed by Psychrobacter immobilis PG1 and Vibrio litoralis\n B4, with 8.5", " [CLS] cheese surface samples\nIn the smear-ripened cheese E, the Arthrobacter arilaitensis GMPA29 [CLS]  reference genome was the most represented, as it corresponded to 19.8% of the total good quality reads, followed by Psychrobacter immobilis PG1 and Vibrio litoralis\n B4, with 8.5", " [CLS] cheese surface samples\nIn the smear-ripened cheese E, the Arthrobacter arilaitensis GMPA29 [CLS]  reference genome was the most represented, as it corresponded to 19.8% of the total good quality reads, followed by Psychrobacter immobilis PG1 and Vibrio litoralis\n B4, with 8.5"]]
["bb_train_363", [" [CLS] smear-ripened cheese E, the Arthrobacter arilaitensis GMPA29 reference genome was the most represented, as it corresponded to 19.8% of the total good quality reads, followed by Psychrobacter immobilis PG1 [CLS]  and Vibrio litoralis\n B4, with 8.5 and 5.2% of the reads, respectively.\n", " [CLS] cheese surface samples\nIn the smear-ripened cheese E, the Arthrobacter arilaitensis GMPA29 reference genome was the most represented, as it corresponded to 19.8% of the total good quality reads, followed by Psychrobacter immobilis PG1 [CLS]  and Vibrio litoralis\n B4, with 8.5 and 5.2% of the reads, respectively.\n", " [CLS] cheese surface samples\nIn the smear-ripened cheese E, the Arthrobacter arilaitensis GMPA29 reference genome was the most represented, as it corresponded to 19.8% of the total good quality reads, followed by Psychrobacter immobilis PG1 [CLS]  and Vibrio litoralis\n B4, with 8.5 and 5.2% of the reads, respectively.\n"]]
["bb_train_364", [" [CLS] cheese surface samples\nIn the smear-ripened cheese E, the Arthrobacter arilaitensis GMPA29 reference genome was the most represented, as it corresponded to 19.8% of the total good quality reads, followed by Psychrobacter immobilis PG1 and Vibrio litoralis\n B4 [CLS] , with 8.5 and 5.2% of the reads, respectively.\n", " [CLS] cheese surface samples\nIn the smear-ripened cheese E, the Arthrobacter arilaitensis GMPA29 reference genome was the most represented, as it corresponded to 19.8% of the total good quality reads, followed by Psychrobacter immobilis PG1 and Vibrio litoralis\n B4 [CLS] , with 8.5 and 5.2% of the reads, respectively.\n", " [CLS] smear-ripened cheese E, the Arthrobacter arilaitensis GMPA29 reference genome was the most represented, as it corresponded to 19.8% of the total good quality reads, followed by Psychrobacter immobilis PG1 and Vibrio litoralis\n B4 [CLS] , with 8.5 and 5.2% of the reads, respectively.\n"]]
["bb_train_365", [" [CLS] Psychrobacter immobilis\n PG1 was isolated from the dairy plant [CLS]  that produces the smear-ripened \ncheese E, but two years earlier. The high proportion of perfect matches \nwith reference strain PG1 may thus be explained by the presence"]]
["bb_train_366", [" [CLS] smear-ripened \ncheese E, but two years earlier. The high proportion of perfect matches \nwith reference strain PG1 [CLS]  may thus be explained by the presence of an \noffspring of this strain in cheese E. Many reads were also assigned to \nthe genomes of the yeasts", " immobilis\n PG1 was isolated from the dairy plant that produces the smear-ripened \ncheese E, but two years earlier. The high proportion of perfect matches \nwith reference  [CLS] strain PG1 may thus be explained by the presence of an \noffspring of this strain in cheese [CLS]  E. Many reads were also assigned to \nthe genomes of the yeasts Geotrichum candidum CLIB 918 and Debaryomyces hansenii CBS767.In the second smear-ripened cheese (cheese L), Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis"]]
["bb_train_367", [" [CLS] smear-ripened \ncheese E, but two years earlier. The high proportion of perfect matches \nwith reference strain PG1 may thus be explained by the presence of an \noffspring of this strain in cheese E. Many reads were also assigned to \nthe genomes of the yeasts Geotrichum candidum CLIB 918 [CLS]  and Debaryomyces hansenii CBS767.In the second smear-ripened cheese (cheese L), Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis TAC125, Halomonas sp. 1 M45 and Psychrobacter celer\n 91 were the three dominant reference bacteria, with"]]
["bb_train_368", [" [CLS] smear-ripened \ncheese E, but two years earlier. The high proportion of perfect matches \nwith reference strain PG1 may thus be explained by the presence of an \noffspring of this strain in cheese E. Many reads were also assigned to \nthe genomes of the yeasts Geotrichum candidum CLIB 918 and Debaryomyces hansenii CBS767 [CLS] .In the second smear-ripened cheese (cheese L), Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis TAC125, Halomonas sp. 1 M45 and Psychrobacter celer\n 91 were the three dominant reference bacteria, with 17.0%, 10.5% and "]]
["bb_train_369", [" this strain in cheese E. Many reads were also assigned to \nthe genomes of the yeasts Geotrichum candidum CLIB 918 and Debaryomyces hansenii CBS767.In the second smear-ripened cheese ( [CLS] cheese L), Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis TAC125 [CLS] , Halomonas sp. 1 M45 and Psychrobacter celer\n 91 were the three dominant reference bacteria, with 17.0%, 10.5% and \n1.7% of the good quality matches, respectively.\n", "\noffspring of this strain in cheese E. Many reads were also assigned to \nthe genomes of the yeasts Geotrichum candidum CLIB 918 and Debaryomyces hansenii CBS767.In the second  [CLS] smear-ripened cheese (cheese L), Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis TAC125 [CLS] , Halomonas sp. 1 M45 and Psychrobacter celer\n 91 were the three dominant reference bacteria, with 17.0%, 10.5% and \n1.7% of the good quality matches, respectively.\n"]]
["bb_train_370", ["\noffspring of this strain in cheese E. Many reads were also assigned to \nthe genomes of the yeasts Geotrichum candidum CLIB 918 and Debaryomyces hansenii CBS767.In the second  [CLS] smear-ripened cheese (cheese L), Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis TAC125, Halomonas sp. 1 M45 [CLS]  and Psychrobacter celer\n 91 were the three dominant reference bacteria, with 17.0%, 10.5% and \n1.7% of the good quality matches, respectively.\n", " this strain in cheese E. Many reads were also assigned to \nthe genomes of the yeasts Geotrichum candidum CLIB 918 and Debaryomyces hansenii CBS767.In the second smear-ripened cheese ( [CLS] cheese L), Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis TAC125, Halomonas sp. 1 M45 [CLS]  and Psychrobacter celer\n 91 were the three dominant reference bacteria, with 17.0%, 10.5% and \n1.7% of the good quality matches, respectively.\n"]]
["bb_train_371", ["\noffspring of this strain in cheese E. Many reads were also assigned to \nthe genomes of the yeasts Geotrichum candidum CLIB 918 and Debaryomyces hansenii CBS767.In the second  [CLS] smear-ripened cheese (cheese L), Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis TAC125, Halomonas sp. 1 M45 and Psychrobacter celer\n 91 [CLS]  were the three dominant reference bacteria, with 17.0%, 10.5% and \n1.7% of the good quality matches, respectively.\n", " this strain in cheese E. Many reads were also assigned to \nthe genomes of the yeasts Geotrichum candidum CLIB 918 and Debaryomyces hansenii CBS767.In the second smear-ripened cheese ( [CLS] cheese L), Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis TAC125, Halomonas sp. 1 M45 and Psychrobacter celer\n 91 [CLS]  were the three dominant reference bacteria, with 17.0%, 10.5% and \n1.7% of the good quality matches, respectively.\n"]]
["bb_train_372", [" [CLS] 1 M45 has also been isolated from a smear-ripened cheese [CLS]  of \nthe same protected designation of origin, it originated from another \nmanufacturing plant. More than fifty thousand reads were assigned to Providencia heimbachae\n GR4.\n"]]
["bb_train_373", [" [CLS] cheese sample are almost \nidentical to the reference strain. However, even though the reference \nstrain 1 M45 has also been isolated from a smear-ripened cheese of \nthe same protected designation of origin, it originated from another \nmanufacturing plant. More than fifty thousand reads were assigned to Providencia heimbachae\n GR4 [CLS] .\n"]]
["bb_train_374", [" [CLS] Penicillium camemberti\n FM 013 genome, with 97.7% of perfect match reads, even though this \nspecies is not known to occur in smear-ripened cheeses [CLS] . One may \nhypothesize that this could result from cross-contamination due to the \nmanufacturing of mould-ripened cheese in the same plant.The surface of the blue-veined cheese G was", " [CLS] cheese L) mapped to the Penicillium camemberti\n FM 013 [CLS]  genome, with 97.7% of perfect match reads, even though this \nspecies is not known to occur in smear-ripened cheeses. One may \nhypothesize that this could result from"]]
["bb_train_375", [" not known to occur in smear-ripened cheeses. One may \nhypothesize that this could result from cross-contamination due to the \nmanufacturing of mould-ripened cheese in the same plant.The  [CLS] surface of the blue-veined cheese G was dominated by a strain close to Arthrobacter bergerei Ca106 [CLS]  (18.6% of the reads, 99.2% perfect match reads). Like for the two other cheeses, Psychrobacter\n species seem to be present in this cheese. Cheese G was probably ", " occur in smear-ripened cheeses. One may \nhypothesize that this could result from cross-contamination due to the \nmanufacturing of mould-ripened cheese in the same plant.The surface of the  [CLS] blue-veined cheese G was dominated by a strain close to Arthrobacter bergerei Ca106 [CLS]  (18.6% of the reads, 99.2% perfect match reads). Like for the two other cheeses, Psychrobacter\n species seem to be present in this cheese. Cheese G was probably "]]
["bb_train_376", [" reads, 99.2% perfect match reads). Like for the two other cheeses, Psychrobacter\n species seem to be present in this cheese. Cheese G was probably \nmanufactured with a  [CLS] thermophilic lactic starter culture, since Streptococcus thermophilus and Lactobacillus delbrueckii [CLS]  species were the dominant lactic acid bacteria, in contrast to the two other cheeses, in which Lactococcus lactis was the dominant lactic acid bacterium. Strains related to other reference", " close to Arthrobacter bergerei Ca106 (18.6% of the reads, 99.2% perfect match reads). Like for the two other cheeses, Psychrobacter\n species seem to be present in this cheese.  [CLS] Cheese G was probably \nmanufactured with a thermophilic lactic starter culture, since Streptococcus thermophilus and Lactobacillus delbrueckii [CLS]  species were the dominant lactic acid bacteria, in contrast to the two other cheeses, in which Lactococcus lactis was the dominant lactic acid bacterium. Strains related to other reference"]]
["bb_train_377", [" two other cheeses, Psychrobacter\n species seem to be present in this cheese. Cheese G was probably \nmanufactured with a thermophilic lactic starter culture, since Streptococcus thermophilus and  [CLS] Lactobacillus delbrueckii species were the dominant lactic acid bacteria [CLS] , in contrast to the two other cheeses, in which Lactococcus lactis was the dominant lactic acid bacterium. Strains related to other reference strains sequenced in the present study, such", " reads, 99.2% perfect match reads). Like for the two other cheeses, Psychrobacter\n species seem to be present in this cheese. Cheese G was probably \nmanufactured with a  [CLS] thermophilic lactic starter culture, since Streptococcus thermophilus and Lactobacillus delbrueckii [CLS]  species were the dominant lactic acid bacteria, in contrast to the two other cheeses, in which Lactococcus lactis was the dominant lactic acid bacterium. Strains related to other reference"]]
["bb_train_378", [" contrast to the two other cheeses, in which Lactococcus lactis was the dominant lactic acid bacterium. Strains related to other reference strains sequenced in the present study, such as  [CLS] Psychrobacter aquimaris, Brachybacterium tyrofermentans, Corynebacterium ammoniagenes, Brevibacterium antiquum, Microbacterium gubbeenense, Brochothrix thermosphacta and Marinilactibacillus psychrotolerans, were also present in the cheeses [CLS]  (>80% perfect match reads, see Additional file 14: Table S8).\n"]]
["bb_train_379", [" the two other cheeses, in which Lactococcus lactis was the dominant lactic acid bacterium. Strains related to other reference strains sequenced in the present study, such as Psychrobacter aquimaris,  [CLS] Brachybacterium tyrofermentans, Corynebacterium ammoniagenes, Brevibacterium antiquum, Microbacterium gubbeenense, Brochothrix thermosphacta and Marinilactibacillus psychrotolerans, were also present in the cheeses [CLS]  (>80% perfect match reads, see Additional file 14: Table S8).\n"]]
["bb_train_380", [" other cheeses, in which Lactococcus lactis was the dominant lactic acid bacterium. Strains related to other reference strains sequenced in the present study, such as Psychrobacter aquimaris, Brachybacterium tyrofermentans,  [CLS] Corynebacterium ammoniagenes, Brevibacterium antiquum, Microbacterium gubbeenense, Brochothrix thermosphacta and Marinilactibacillus psychrotolerans, were also present in the cheeses [CLS]  (>80% perfect match reads, see Additional file 14: Table S8).\n"]]
["bb_train_381", [" in which Lactococcus lactis was the dominant lactic acid bacterium. Strains related to other reference strains sequenced in the present study, such as Psychrobacter aquimaris, Brachybacterium tyrofermentans, Corynebacterium ammoniagenes,  [CLS] Brevibacterium antiquum, Microbacterium gubbeenense, Brochothrix thermosphacta and Marinilactibacillus psychrotolerans, were also present in the cheeses [CLS]  (>80% perfect match reads, see Additional file 14: Table S8).\n"]]
["bb_train_382", [" was the dominant lactic acid bacterium. Strains related to other reference strains sequenced in the present study, such as Psychrobacter aquimaris, Brachybacterium tyrofermentans, Corynebacterium ammoniagenes, Brevibacterium antiquum, Microbacterium gubbeenense,  [CLS] Brochothrix thermosphacta and Marinilactibacillus psychrotolerans, were also present in the cheeses [CLS]  (>80% perfect match reads, see Additional file 14: Table S8).\n"]]
["bb_train_383", [" [CLS] cheese \nsamples is sequenced, the high throughput sequencing may detect any type\n of DNA (bacteria, archaea, eukaryotes and viruses), provided that \nadequate references are used. Eukaryotes, such as Geotrichum candidum, Debaryomyces hansenii, and Penicillium roqueforti [CLS] ,\n were found, which was not surprising, as these fungi are frequently \nused in cheesemaking.\n"]]
["bb_train_384", [" [CLS] Leuconostoc genus (see Additional file 14: Table S8), known to be part of the minority population in cheeses [CLS]  [48]. However, additional experiments may be needed to validate the identification and quantitation of low abundance populations.Presence\n or absence of complete set of genes or of specific genes,", " [CLS] Cheeses with consortium (A) (composed of Lb. plantarum (FH3)+ H. alvei (B16)+ Lc. lactis (D5.3)) had higher levels of dextran-producing Leuconostoc [CLS] , Lactococcus, Lactobacillus (due to the inoculation) and non-Pseudomonas Gram negative bacteria. They had lower counts of other non-inoculated groups such as Pseudomonas,\n Gram positive catalase positive bacteria and"]]
["bb_train_385", [" [CLS] Pseudoalteromonas, Halomonas, Vibrio, Marinilactibacillus and Psychrobacter are Gram-negative bacteria which had been previously detected in such cheeses[1, 2, 9, 12, 13, 28, 49\u201353], and also in a recent large amplicon sequencing study of the microbial composition of 137 different cheese rinds [CLS]  [33].\n", " [CLS] Pseudoalteromonas, Halomonas, Vibrio, Marinilactibacillus and Psychrobacter are Gram-negative bacteria which had been previously detected in such cheeses [CLS] [1, 2, 9, 12, 13, 28, 49\u201353], and also in a recent large amplicon sequencing study of the microbial composition of 137 different cheese rinds [33].\n"]]
["bb_train_386", [" [CLS] Pseudoalteromonas, Halomonas, Vibrio, Marinilactibacillus and Psychrobacter are Gram-negative [CLS]  bacteria which had been previously detected in such cheeses[1, 2, 9, 12, 13, 28, 49\u201353], and also in a recent large amplicon sequencing study of the microbial composition of"]]
["bb_train_387", [" [CLS] Halomonas, Vibrio, Marinilactibacillus and Psychrobacter are Gram-negative [CLS]  bacteria which had been previously detected in such cheeses[1, 2, 9, 12, 13, 28, 49\u201353], and also in a recent large amplicon sequencing study of the microbial composition of"]]
["bb_train_388", [" [CLS] Vibrio, Marinilactibacillus and Psychrobacter are Gram-negative [CLS]  bacteria which had been previously detected in such cheeses[1, 2, 9, 12, 13, 28, 49\u201353], and also in a recent large amplicon sequencing study of the microbial composition of"]]
["bb_train_389", [" [CLS] Marinilactibacillus and Psychrobacter are Gram-negative bacteria which had been previously detected in such cheeses [CLS] [1, 2, 9, 12, 13, 28, 49\u201353], and also in a recent large amplicon sequencing study of the microbial composition of 137 different cheese rinds [33].\n", " [CLS] Marinilactibacillus and Psychrobacter are Gram-negative bacteria which had been previously detected in such cheeses[1, 2, 9, 12, 13, 28, 49\u201353], and also in a recent large amplicon sequencing study of the microbial composition of 137 different cheese rinds [CLS]  [33].\n"]]
["bb_train_390", [" [CLS] Marinilactibacillus and Psychrobacter are Gram-negative [CLS]  bacteria which had been previously detected in such cheeses[1, 2, 9, 12, 13, 28, 49\u201353], and also in a recent large amplicon sequencing study of the microbial composition of"]]
["bb_train_391", [" [CLS] Psychrobacter are Gram-negative [CLS]  bacteria which had been previously detected in such cheeses[1, 2, 9, 12, 13, 28, 49\u201353], and also in a recent large amplicon sequencing study of the microbial composition of"]]
["bb_train_392", [" [CLS] Lactococcus garvieae, Leuconostoc pseudomesenteroides, Leuconostoc \ncitreum, Lactobacillus sp, Carnobacterium mobile, Enterococcus faecalis,\n Enterococcus faecium, Macrococcus caseolyticus and Hafnia alvei reduced STEC O26:H11 counts by 1.4\u20132.5 log cfu g\u22121\n and to a lesser extent STEC O157:H7 counts in pasteurized milk cheeses [CLS] .\n"]]
["bb_train_393", [" [CLS] Leuconostoc pseudomesenteroides, Leuconostoc \ncitreum, Lactobacillus sp, Carnobacterium mobile, Enterococcus faecalis,\n Enterococcus faecium, Macrococcus caseolyticus and Hafnia alvei reduced STEC O26:H11 counts by 1.4\u20132.5 log cfu g\u22121\n and to a lesser extent STEC O157:H7 counts in pasteurized milk cheeses [CLS] .\n"]]
["bb_train_394", [" [CLS] Leuconostoc \ncitreum, Lactobacillus sp, Carnobacterium mobile, Enterococcus faecalis,\n Enterococcus faecium, Macrococcus caseolyticus and Hafnia alvei reduced STEC O26:H11 counts by 1.4\u20132.5 log cfu g\u22121\n and to a lesser extent STEC O157:H7 counts in pasteurized milk cheeses [CLS] .\n"]]
["bb_train_395", [" [CLS] Lactobacillus sp, Carnobacterium mobile, Enterococcus faecalis,\n Enterococcus faecium, Macrococcus caseolyticus and Hafnia alvei reduced STEC O26:H11 counts by 1.4\u20132.5 log cfu g\u22121\n and to a lesser extent STEC O157:H7 counts in pasteurized milk cheeses [CLS] .\n"]]
["bb_train_396", [" [CLS] Carnobacterium mobile, Enterococcus faecalis,\n Enterococcus faecium, Macrococcus caseolyticus and Hafnia alvei reduced STEC O26:H11 counts by 1.4\u20132.5 log cfu g\u22121\n and to a lesser extent STEC O157:H7 counts in pasteurized milk cheeses [CLS] .\n"]]
["bb_train_397", [" [CLS] Enterococcus faecium, Macrococcus caseolyticus and Hafnia alvei reduced STEC O26:H11 counts by 1.4\u20132.5 log cfu g\u22121\n and to a lesser extent STEC O157:H7 counts in pasteurized milk cheeses [CLS] .\n"]]
["bb_train_398", [" [CLS] Macrococcus caseolyticus and Hafnia alvei reduced STEC O26:H11 counts by 1.4\u20132.5 log cfu g\u22121\n and to a lesser extent STEC O157:H7 counts in pasteurized milk cheeses [CLS] .\n"]]
["bb_train_399", [" [CLS] STEC O26:H11 counts by 1.4\u20132.5 log cfu g\u22121\n and to a lesser extent STEC O157:H7 counts in pasteurized milk cheeses [CLS] .\n", " [CLS] STEC O26:H11 and O157:H7, inoculated at \n2 log cfu ml\u22121, were reduced by up to 3 log cfu g\u22121 in ripened cheese [CLS] .\n", " M. caseolyticus (RP8) have also been described as inhibiting Listeria monocytogenes ( Callon et al., 2011). Delbes-Paus et al. (2013) described a strain of H. alvei that can inhibit  [CLS] STEC O26:H11 in an uncooked pressed model cheese [CLS] .\n"]]
["bb_train_400", [" [CLS] STEC O26:H11 [CLS]  counts by 1.4\u20132.5 log cfu g\u22121\n and to a lesser extent STEC O157:H7 counts in pasteurized milk cheeses.\n", " [CLS] STEC O26:H11 [CLS]  and O157:H7, inoculated at \n2 log cfu ml\u22121, were reduced by up to 3 log cfu g\u22121 in ripened cheese.\n", " M. caseolyticus (RP8) have also been described as inhibiting Listeria monocytogenes ( Callon et al., 2011). Delbes-Paus et al. (2013) described a strain of H. alvei that can inhibit  [CLS] STEC O26:H11 [CLS]  in an uncooked pressed model cheese.\n"]]
["bb_train_401", [" Lactobacillus sp, Carnobacterium mobile, Enterococcus faecalis,\n Enterococcus faecium, Macrococcus caseolyticus and Hafnia alvei reduced STEC O26:H11 counts by 1.4\u20132.5 log cfu g\u22121\n and to a lesser extent  [CLS] STEC O157:H7 counts in pasteurized milk cheeses [CLS] .\n", " [CLS] STEC O26:H11 and O157:H7, inoculated at \n2 log cfu ml\u22121, were reduced by up to 3 log cfu g\u22121 in ripened cheese [CLS] .\n"]]
["bb_train_402", [" Lactobacillus sp, Carnobacterium mobile, Enterococcus faecalis,\n Enterococcus faecium, Macrococcus caseolyticus and Hafnia alvei reduced STEC O26:H11 counts by 1.4\u20132.5 log cfu g\u22121\n and to a lesser extent  [CLS] STEC O157:H7 [CLS]  counts in pasteurized milk cheeses.\n"]]
["bb_train_403", [" [CLS] H. alvei, Lactobacillus plantarum and Lc. lactis\n was the most inhibitory: after inoculation of this consortium into \nmilk [CLS] , STEC O26:H11 and O157:H7, inoculated at \n2 log cfu ml\u22121, were reduced by up to 3 log cfu g\u22121 in ripened cheese.\n", " citreum (M2), Lb. plantarum (FH3), M. caseolyticus (RP8) have also been described as inhibiting Listeria monocytogenes ( Callon et al., 2011). Delbes-Paus et al. (2013) described a strain of  [CLS] H. alvei that can inhibit STEC O26:H11 in an uncooked pressed model cheese [CLS] .\n"]]
["bb_train_404", [" [CLS] Lc. lactis\n was the most inhibitory: after inoculation of this consortium into \nmilk [CLS] , STEC O26:H11 and O157:H7, inoculated at \n2 log cfu ml\u22121, were reduced by up to 3 log cfu g\u22121 in ripened cheese.\n"]]
["bb_train_405", [" [CLS] Cheeses with consortium (A) (composed of Lb. plantarum (FH3) [CLS] + H. alvei (B16)+ Lc. lactis (D5.3)) had higher levels of dextran-producing Leuconostoc, Lactococcus, Lactobacillus (due to the inoculation) and non-Pseudomonas Gram negative bacteria. They had lower counts of other"]]
["bb_train_406", [" [CLS] Cheeses with consortium (A) (composed of Lb. plantarum (FH3)+ H. alvei (B16) [CLS] + Lc. lactis (D5.3)) had higher levels of dextran-producing Leuconostoc, Lactococcus, Lactobacillus (due to the inoculation) and non-Pseudomonas Gram negative bacteria. They had lower counts of other non-inoculated groups such", " [CLS] cheese \ninoculated with H. alvei (B16) [CLS]  alone was clearly different\n from other cheeses, being associated with dairy product, salty and \nbutter aroma and a granular texture.\n"]]
["bb_train_407", [" [CLS] Cheeses with consortium (A) (composed of Lb. plantarum (FH3)+ H. alvei (B16)+ Lc. lactis (D5.3) [CLS] ) had higher levels of dextran-producing Leuconostoc, Lactococcus, Lactobacillus (due to the inoculation) and non-Pseudomonas Gram negative bacteria. They had lower counts of other non-inoculated groups such as Pseudomonas,\n"]]
["bb_train_408", [" [CLS] dextran-producing Leuconostoc [CLS] , Lactococcus, Lactobacillus (due to the inoculation) and non-Pseudomonas Gram negative bacteria. They had lower counts of other non-inoculated groups such as Pseudomonas,\n Gram positive catalase positive bacteria and"]]
["bb_train_409", [" [CLS] Cheeses with consortium (A) (composed of Lb. plantarum (FH3)+ H. alvei (B16)+ Lc. lactis (D5.3)) had higher levels of dextran-producing Leuconostoc, Lactococcus [CLS] , Lactobacillus (due to the inoculation) and non-Pseudomonas Gram negative bacteria. They had lower counts of other non-inoculated groups such as Pseudomonas,\n Gram positive catalase positive bacteria and yeasts."]]
["bb_train_410", [" [CLS] Cheeses with consortium (A) (composed of Lb. plantarum (FH3)+ H. alvei (B16)+ Lc. lactis (D5.3)) had higher levels of dextran-producing Leuconostoc, Lactococcus, Lactobacillus [CLS]  (due to the inoculation) and non-Pseudomonas Gram negative bacteria. They had lower counts of other non-inoculated groups such as Pseudomonas,\n Gram positive catalase positive bacteria and yeasts.\n"]]
["bb_train_411", [" [CLS] Cheeses with consortium (A) (composed of Lb. plantarum (FH3)+ H. alvei (B16)+ Lc. lactis (D5.3)) had higher levels of dextran-producing Leuconostoc, Lactococcus, Lactobacillus (due to the inoculation) and non-Pseudomonas Gram negative bacteria. They had lower counts of other non-inoculated groups such as Pseudomonas [CLS] ,\n Gram positive catalase positive bacteria and yeasts.\n"]]
["bb_train_412", [" [CLS] LAB has been correlated to specific gene clusters tagged as eps or cps, located, as in Streptococcus thermophilus or Lactobacillus plantarum [CLS] , mainly on the bacterial chromosome (Stingele et al. 1996; De Vuyst and Degeest 1999; Siezen et al. 2010) or in species such as Lactococcus lactis and Pediococcus damnsosus predominantly", " [CLS] production of exopolysaccharides by LAB has been correlated to specific gene clusters tagged as eps or cps, located, as in Streptococcus thermophilus or Lactobacillus plantarum [CLS] , mainly on the bacterial chromosome (Stingele et al. 1996; De Vuyst and Degeest 1999; Siezen et al. 2010) or in species such as Lactococcus lactis and Pediococcus damnsosus predominantly"]]
["bb_train_413", [" [CLS] LAB has been correlated to specific gene clusters tagged as eps or cps, located, as in Streptococcus thermophilus or Lactobacillus plantarum, mainly on the bacterial chromosome (Stingele et al. 1996; De Vuyst and Degeest 1999; Siezen et al. 2010) or in species such as Lactococcus lactis and Pediococcus damnsosus [CLS]  predominantly on plasmids (Van Kranenburg et al. 1997, 1999b). Remus et al. (2012) identified four cps genes clusters in the chromosome of L. plantarum WCFS1, which are associated with", " [CLS] production of exopolysaccharides by LAB has been correlated to specific gene clusters tagged as eps or cps, located, as in Streptococcus thermophilus or Lactobacillus plantarum, mainly on the bacterial chromosome (Stingele et al. 1996; De Vuyst and Degeest 1999; Siezen et al. 2010) or in species such as Lactococcus lactis and Pediococcus damnsosus [CLS]  predominantly on plasmids (Van Kranenburg et al. 1997, 1999b). Remus et al. (2012) identified four cps genes clusters in the chromosome of L. plantarum WCFS1, which are associated with"]]
["bb_train_414", [" such as Lactococcus lactis and Pediococcus damnsosus predominantly on plasmids (Van Kranenburg et al. 1997, 1999b). Remus et al. (2012) identified four cps genes clusters in the chromosome of  [CLS] L. plantarum WCFS1, which are associated with surface polysaccharide production [CLS] .\n"]]
["bb_train_415", [" [CLS] LAB, the yield of heteropolysaccharides is quite variable (Tsuda 2013); one of the largest EPS producers is L. rhamnosus RW-9595M [CLS]  (2775 mg/L) (Macedo et al. 2002) and Lactobacillus kefiranofaciens WT-2B (2500 mg/L) (Maeda et al. 2004a) followed by L. lactis subsp. cremoris (80\u2013600 mg/L), S. thermophilus (50\u2013350 mg/L), Lactobacillus", " [CLS] EPS producers is L. rhamnosus RW-9595M [CLS]  (2775 mg/L) (Macedo et al. 2002) and Lactobacillus kefiranofaciens WT-2B (2500 mg/L) (Maeda et al. 2004a) followed by L. lactis subsp. cremoris (80\u2013600 mg/L), S. thermophilus (50\u2013350 mg/L), Lactobacillus"]]
["bb_train_416", [" [CLS] LAB, the yield of heteropolysaccharides is quite variable (Tsuda 2013); one of the largest EPS producers is L. rhamnosus RW-9595M (2775 mg/L) (Macedo et al. 2002) and Lactobacillus kefiranofaciens WT-2B [CLS]  (2500 mg/L) (Maeda et al. 2004a) followed by L. lactis subsp. cremoris (80\u2013600 mg/L), S. thermophilus (50\u2013350 mg/L), Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus (60\u2013150 mg/L), Lactobacillus casei (50\u201360 mg/L) (Cerning", " [CLS] EPS producers is L. rhamnosus RW-9595M (2775 mg/L) (Macedo et al. 2002) and Lactobacillus kefiranofaciens WT-2B [CLS]  (2500 mg/L) (Maeda et al. 2004a) followed by L. lactis subsp. cremoris (80\u2013600 mg/L), S. thermophilus (50\u2013350 mg/L), Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus (60\u2013150 mg/L), Lactobacillus casei (50\u201360 mg/L) (Cerning"]]
["bb_train_417", [" [CLS] LAB, the yield of heteropolysaccharides is quite variable (Tsuda 2013); one of the largest EPS producers is L. rhamnosus RW-9595M (2775 mg/L) (Macedo et al. 2002) and Lactobacillus kefiranofaciens WT-2B (2500 mg/L) (Maeda et al. 2004a) followed by L. lactis subsp. cremoris [CLS]  (80\u2013600 mg/L), S. thermophilus (50\u2013350 mg/L), Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus (60\u2013150 mg/L), Lactobacillus casei (50\u201360 mg/L) (Cerning 1995), and L. plantarum (140 mg/L) (Tsuda and Miyamoto 2010).\n", " [CLS] EPS producers is L. rhamnosus RW-9595M (2775 mg/L) (Macedo et al. 2002) and Lactobacillus kefiranofaciens WT-2B (2500 mg/L) (Maeda et al. 2004a) followed by L. lactis subsp. cremoris [CLS]  (80\u2013600 mg/L), S. thermophilus (50\u2013350 mg/L), Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus (60\u2013150 mg/L), Lactobacillus casei (50\u201360 mg/L) (Cerning 1995), and L. plantarum (140 mg/L) (Tsuda and Miyamoto 2010).\n"]]
["bb_train_418", [" [CLS] EPS producers is L. rhamnosus RW-9595M (2775 mg/L) (Macedo et al. 2002) and Lactobacillus kefiranofaciens WT-2B (2500 mg/L) (Maeda et al. 2004a) followed by L. lactis subsp. cremoris (80\u2013600 mg/L), S. thermophilus [CLS]  (50\u2013350 mg/L), Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus (60\u2013150 mg/L), Lactobacillus casei (50\u201360 mg/L) (Cerning 1995), and L. plantarum (140 mg/L) (Tsuda and Miyamoto 2010).\n", " [CLS] LAB, the yield of heteropolysaccharides is quite variable (Tsuda 2013); one of the largest EPS producers is L. rhamnosus RW-9595M (2775 mg/L) (Macedo et al. 2002) and Lactobacillus kefiranofaciens WT-2B (2500 mg/L) (Maeda et al. 2004a) followed by L. lactis subsp. cremoris (80\u2013600 mg/L), S. thermophilus [CLS]  (50\u2013350 mg/L), Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus (60\u2013150 mg/L), Lactobacillus casei (50\u201360 mg/L) (Cerning 1995), and L. plantarum (140 mg/L) (Tsuda and Miyamoto 2010).\n"]]
["bb_train_419", [" [CLS] EPS producers is L. rhamnosus RW-9595M (2775 mg/L) (Macedo et al. 2002) and Lactobacillus kefiranofaciens WT-2B (2500 mg/L) (Maeda et al. 2004a) followed by L. lactis subsp. cremoris (80\u2013600 mg/L), S. thermophilus (50\u2013350 mg/L), Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus [CLS]  (60\u2013150 mg/L), Lactobacillus casei (50\u201360 mg/L) (Cerning 1995), and L. plantarum (140 mg/L) (Tsuda and Miyamoto 2010).\n", " [CLS] LAB, the yield of heteropolysaccharides is quite variable (Tsuda 2013); one of the largest EPS producers is L. rhamnosus RW-9595M (2775 mg/L) (Macedo et al. 2002) and Lactobacillus kefiranofaciens WT-2B (2500 mg/L) (Maeda et al. 2004a) followed by L. lactis subsp. cremoris (80\u2013600 mg/L), S. thermophilus (50\u2013350 mg/L), Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus [CLS]  (60\u2013150 mg/L), Lactobacillus casei (50\u201360 mg/L) (Cerning 1995), and L. plantarum (140 mg/L) (Tsuda and Miyamoto 2010).\n"]]
["bb_train_420", [" [CLS] LAB, the yield of heteropolysaccharides is quite variable (Tsuda 2013); one of the largest EPS producers is L. rhamnosus RW-9595M (2775 mg/L) (Macedo et al. 2002) and Lactobacillus kefiranofaciens WT-2B (2500 mg/L) (Maeda et al. 2004a) followed by L. lactis subsp. cremoris (80\u2013600 mg/L), S. thermophilus (50\u2013350 mg/L), Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus (60\u2013150 mg/L), Lactobacillus casei [CLS]  (50\u201360 mg/L) (Cerning 1995), and L. plantarum (140 mg/L) (Tsuda and Miyamoto 2010).\n", " [CLS] EPS producers is L. rhamnosus RW-9595M (2775 mg/L) (Macedo et al. 2002) and Lactobacillus kefiranofaciens WT-2B (2500 mg/L) (Maeda et al. 2004a) followed by L. lactis subsp. cremoris (80\u2013600 mg/L), S. thermophilus (50\u2013350 mg/L), Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus (60\u2013150 mg/L), Lactobacillus casei [CLS]  (50\u201360 mg/L) (Cerning 1995), and L. plantarum (140 mg/L) (Tsuda and Miyamoto 2010).\n"]]
["bb_train_421", [" [CLS] EPS producers is L. rhamnosus RW-9595M (2775 mg/L) (Macedo et al. 2002) and Lactobacillus kefiranofaciens WT-2B (2500 mg/L) (Maeda et al. 2004a) followed by L. lactis subsp. cremoris (80\u2013600 mg/L), S. thermophilus (50\u2013350 mg/L), Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus (60\u2013150 mg/L), Lactobacillus casei (50\u201360 mg/L) (Cerning 1995), and L. plantarum [CLS]  (140 mg/L) (Tsuda and Miyamoto 2010).\n", " [CLS] LAB, the yield of heteropolysaccharides is quite variable (Tsuda 2013); one of the largest EPS producers is L. rhamnosus RW-9595M (2775 mg/L) (Macedo et al. 2002) and Lactobacillus kefiranofaciens WT-2B (2500 mg/L) (Maeda et al. 2004a) followed by L. lactis subsp. cremoris (80\u2013600 mg/L), S. thermophilus (50\u2013350 mg/L), Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus (60\u2013150 mg/L), Lactobacillus casei (50\u201360 mg/L) (Cerning 1995), and L. plantarum [CLS]  (140 mg/L) (Tsuda and Miyamoto 2010).\n"]]
["bb_train_422", [" [CLS] \u03b2-glucan produced by P. parvulus [CLS]  confers to Lactobacillus paracasei\n higher survival during gastrointestinal passage or technological \nprocess conditions.\n"]]
["bb_dev_0", [" chain reaction (PCR) data should be viewed with caution. We investigated the reliability of PCR versus immunophenotyping in diagnosing early gastric MALT lymphoma. We studied 1511 biopsies from eight  [CLS] patients with high-grade primary gastric lymphoma, 25 with low-grade MALT lymphoma, 32 with atypical lymphoid infiltrates, and 39 with Helicobacter pylori-chronic active gastritis [CLS] . Paraffin sections from all cases were stained with antibodies to CD20, CD3, AE1/AE3, kappa and lambda. PCR was performed on paraffin sections using the primer set VH-FR3/J(H). Using histopathology", " [CLS] Helicobacter pylori infection in dyspeptic patients [CLS]  in the Republic of Yemen and the recurrence rate 1 year after apparently successful eradication.\nA total of 275 patients with chronic dyspepsia seen in one clinic were enrolled.", " [CLS] duodenal ulcer with Helicobacter pylori [CLS]  infection.\nAntimicrobial therapy is the recommended treatment for duodenal ulcer associated with Helicobacter pylori infection. The eradication of bismuth-based triple therapy with bismuth subcitrate, metronidazole and amoxicillin is limited", " [CLS] duodenal ulcer with Helicobacter pylori [CLS]  infection.\nAntimicrobial therapy is the recommended treatment for duodenal ulcer associated with Helicobacter pylori infection. The eradication of bismuth-based triple therapy with bismuth subcitrate, metronidazole and amoxicillin is limited", " [CLS] duodenal ulcer associated with Helicobacter pylori [CLS]  infection. The eradication of bismuth-based triple therapy with bismuth subcitrate, metronidazole and amoxicillin is limited by low compliance, drug resistance and side-effects. Two-week proton pump inhibitor (PPI)-based triple therapy", " [CLS] duodenal ulcer associated with Helicobacter pylori [CLS]  infection. The eradication of bismuth-based triple therapy with bismuth subcitrate, metronidazole and amoxicillin is limited by low compliance, drug resistance and side-effects. Two-week proton pump inhibitor (PPI)-based triple therapy"]]
["bb_dev_1", [" [CLS] Listeria sp. and Listeria monocytogenes in a chicken nugget processing plant [CLS] .\nThis study measures the detection performances of two rapid test systems (Listeria Rapid Test Clearview and Bax system) for the screening of Listeria sp. and Listeria monocytogenes, respectively. A", " monocytogenes in a chicken nugget processing plant.\nThis study measures the detection performances of two rapid test systems (Listeria Rapid Test Clearview and Bax system) for the screening of  [CLS] Listeria sp. and Listeria monocytogenes, respectively. A total of 413 samples from different sources (product from (i) different stages of processing, (ii) different environments, and (iii) different food handlers), collected from a chicken nugget [CLS]  processing plant, were analysed by both rapid methods and a cultural method consisting of pre-enrichment, enrichment, and isolation onto selective agars (PALCAM, LPM, and HCLA). Overall, results showed an", " monocytogenes in a chicken nugget processing plant.\nThis study measures the detection performances of two rapid test systems (Listeria Rapid Test Clearview and Bax system) for the screening of  [CLS] Listeria sp. and Listeria monocytogenes, respectively. A total of 413 samples from different sources (product from (i) different stages of processing, (ii) different environments, and (iii) different food handlers), collected from a chicken nugget processing plant [CLS] , were analysed by both rapid methods and a cultural method consisting of pre-enrichment, enrichment, and isolation onto selective agars (PALCAM, LPM, and HCLA). Overall, results showed an excellent correlation"]]
["bb_dev_2", [" [CLS] Listeria monocytogenes in a chicken nugget processing plant [CLS] .\nThis study measures the detection performances of two rapid test systems (Listeria Rapid Test Clearview and Bax system) for the screening of Listeria sp. and Listeria monocytogenes, respectively. A", " chicken nugget processing plant.\nThis study measures the detection performances of two rapid test systems (Listeria Rapid Test Clearview and Bax system) for the screening of Listeria sp. and  [CLS] Listeria monocytogenes, respectively. A total of 413 samples from different sources (product from (i) different stages of processing, (ii) different environments, and (iii) different food handlers), collected from a chicken nugget processing plant, were analysed by both rapid methods and a cultural method consisting of pre-enrichment, enrichment, and isolation onto selective agars (PALCAM, LPM [CLS] , and HCLA). Overall, results showed an excellent correlation between data obtained using Clearview and the cultural method, with Clearview presenting an efficiency of 99%. Bax showed a lower correlation", " chicken nugget processing plant.\nThis study measures the detection performances of two rapid test systems (Listeria Rapid Test Clearview and Bax system) for the screening of Listeria sp. and  [CLS] Listeria monocytogenes, respectively. A total of 413 samples from different sources (product from (i) different stages of processing, (ii) different environments, and (iii) different food handlers), collected from a chicken nugget processing plant, were analysed by both rapid methods and a cultural method consisting of pre-enrichment, enrichment, and isolation onto selective agars (PALCAM [CLS] , LPM, and HCLA). Overall, results showed an excellent correlation between data obtained using Clearview and the cultural method, with Clearview presenting an efficiency of 99%. Bax showed a lower", " chicken nugget processing plant.\nThis study measures the detection performances of two rapid test systems (Listeria Rapid Test Clearview and Bax system) for the screening of Listeria sp. and  [CLS] Listeria monocytogenes, respectively. A total of 413 samples from different sources (product from (i) different stages of processing, (ii) different environments, and (iii) different food handlers), collected from a chicken nugget processing plant [CLS] , were analysed by both rapid methods and a cultural method consisting of pre-enrichment, enrichment, and isolation onto selective agars (PALCAM, LPM, and HCLA). Overall, results showed an excellent correlation", " chicken nugget processing plant.\nThis study measures the detection performances of two rapid test systems (Listeria Rapid Test Clearview and Bax system) for the screening of Listeria sp. and  [CLS] Listeria monocytogenes, respectively. A total of 413 samples from different sources (product from (i) different stages of processing, (ii) different environments, and (iii) different food handlers), collected from a chicken nugget [CLS]  processing plant, were analysed by both rapid methods and a cultural method consisting of pre-enrichment, enrichment, and isolation onto selective agars (PALCAM, LPM, and HCLA). Overall, results showed an", " chicken nugget processing plant.\nThis study measures the detection performances of two rapid test systems (Listeria Rapid Test Clearview and Bax system) for the screening of Listeria sp. and  [CLS] Listeria monocytogenes, respectively. A total of 413 samples from different sources (product from (i) different stages of processing, (ii) different environments, and (iii) different food handlers), collected from a chicken nugget processing plant, were analysed by both rapid methods and a cultural method consisting of pre-enrichment, enrichment, and isolation onto selective agars (PALCAM, LPM, and HCLA [CLS] ). Overall, results showed an excellent correlation between data obtained using Clearview and the cultural method, with Clearview presenting an efficiency of 99%. Bax showed a lower correlation using the", " [CLS] soft smear cheeses with Listeria monocytogenes [CLS]  is an important problem for the consumer's health, leading to industrial substantial financial losses ( Cocolin et al., 2009, de Cesare et al., 2007, Lomonaco et al., 2009 and"]]
["bb_dev_3", [" [CLS] Helicobacter pylori infection and the development of atrophic gastritis and gastric cancer in Japan [CLS] .\nThe incidence of gastric cancer and the prevalence of Helicobacter pylori are high in Japan, so it is an important issue whether long-term H. pylori infection leads to chronic", " [CLS] Helicobacter pylori are high in Japan [CLS] , so it is an important issue whether long-term H. pylori infection leads to chronic atrophic gastritis, considered one of the precursors of gastric cancer. We have reported that the", " [CLS] Helicobacter pylori infection 1 year after successful treatment: prospective cohort study in the Republic of Yemen [CLS] .\nTo investigate the prevalence of Helicobacter pylori infection in dyspeptic patients in the Republic of Yemen and the recurrence rate 1 year after apparently successful eradication.\nA total of", " [CLS] Helicobacter pylori infection in dyspeptic patients in the Republic of Yemen [CLS]  and the recurrence rate 1 year after apparently successful eradication.\nA total of 275 patients with chronic dyspepsia seen in one clinic were enrolled. Gastric biopsies were obtained at"]]
["bb_dev_4", [" whether long-term H. pylori infection leads to chronic atrophic gastritis, considered one of the precursors of gastric cancer. We have reported that the grade of atrophy was higher in  [CLS] H. pylori-positive subjects [CLS]  than in H. pylori-negative subjects. It has also been reported that the atrophy of gastric mucosa increased in H. pylori-infected monkeys compared with control monkeys in a 5-year follow-up", " that the grade of atrophy was higher in H. pylori-positive subjects than in H. pylori-negative subjects. It has also been reported that the atrophy of gastric mucosa increased in  [CLS] H. pylori-infected monkeys [CLS]  compared with control monkeys in a 5-year follow-up study. Most H. pylori infections occur in children, and atrophy of the gastric mucosa progresses during aging. Long-term data show that", " H. pylori-negative subjects. It has also been reported that the atrophy of gastric mucosa increased in H. pylori-infected monkeys compared with control monkeys in a 5-year follow-up study. Most  [CLS] H. pylori infections occur in children [CLS] , and atrophy of the gastric mucosa progresses during aging. Long-term data show that H. pylori infection can lead to gastric atrophy and may play an important role in the", " H. pylori infection can lead to gastric atrophy and may play an important role in the development of gastric cancer. Interestingly, there was no difference in the prevalence of  [CLS] H. pylori between patients with chronic gastritis and gastric cancer [CLS]  in Japan, but the prevalence of H. pylori in young Japanese gastric cancer patients was significantly higher than in the control group. These data clearly show that H. pylori", " H. pylori infection can lead to gastric atrophy and may play an important role in the development of gastric cancer. Interestingly, there was no difference in the prevalence of  [CLS] H. pylori between patients with chronic gastritis [CLS]  and gastric cancer in Japan, but the prevalence of H. pylori in young Japanese gastric cancer patients was significantly higher than in the control group. These data clearly show", " development of gastric cancer. Interestingly, there was no difference in the prevalence of H. pylori between patients with chronic gastritis and gastric cancer in Japan, but the prevalence of  [CLS] H. pylori in young Japanese gastric cancer patients [CLS]  was significantly higher than in the control group. These data clearly show that H. pylori infection is one of the risk factors of gastric cancer in young Japanese people,", " gastric cancer in Japan, but the prevalence of H. pylori in young Japanese gastric cancer patients was significantly higher than in the control group. These data clearly show that  [CLS] H. pylori infection is one of the risk factors of gastric cancer in young Japanese people [CLS] , There is no answer to whether curing H. pylori infection can reverse the atrophy of the gastric mucosa and decrease the risk of gastric cancer development. To clarify this", " in the Republic of Yemen and the recurrence rate 1 year after apparently successful eradication.\nA total of 275 patients with chronic dyspepsia seen in one clinic were enrolled.  [CLS] Gastric biopsies were obtained at endoscopy and H. pylori [CLS]  infection was diagnosed using the rapid urease test. Patients with H. pylori infection were given either clarithromycin or metronidazole-based triple therapy. Six weeks later H. pylori status was assessed", " of 275 patients with chronic dyspepsia seen in one clinic were enrolled. Gastric biopsies were obtained at endoscopy and H. pylori infection was diagnosed using the rapid urease test.  [CLS] Patients with H. pylori infection [CLS]  were given either clarithromycin or metronidazole-based triple therapy. Six weeks later H. pylori status was assessed using the C-urea breath test (C-UBT). Those who were negative for H. pylori", " 3.5 per million but equal to or greater than 2.5 per million at 6 weeks after treatment (odds ratio 2.28; 95% CI 1.17-4.44; P = 0.028).\nThe prevalence of  [CLS] H. pylori infection in dyspeptic patients [CLS]  in Yemen is very high, the eradication rate with standard triple therapy was unsatisfactory probably because of widespread bacterial resistance due to unrestricted antibiotic use. The recurrence rate of"]]
["bb_dev_5", [" H. pylori infection can lead to gastric atrophy and may play an important role in the development of gastric cancer. Interestingly, there was no difference in the prevalence of  [CLS] H. pylori between patients with chronic gastritis and gastric cancer in Japan [CLS] , but the prevalence of H. pylori in young Japanese gastric cancer patients was significantly higher than in the control group. These data clearly show that H. pylori infection is", " 3.5 per million but equal to or greater than 2.5 per million at 6 weeks after treatment (odds ratio 2.28; 95% CI 1.17-4.44; P = 0.028).\nThe prevalence of  [CLS] H. pylori infection in dyspeptic patients in Yemen [CLS]  is very high, the eradication rate with standard triple therapy was unsatisfactory probably because of widespread bacterial resistance due to unrestricted antibiotic use. The recurrence rate of infection at"]]
["bb_dev_6", [" [CLS] Vibrio parahaemolyticus from clinical and environmental sources in Togo (West Africa [CLS] ).\nSerological analysis of O and K antigens was performed on 343 strains of Vibro parahaemolyticus isolated from clinical and environmental sources in Togo. Only two strains were not typable", " [CLS] Vibrio parahaemolyticus from clinical and environmental sources in Togo [CLS]  (West Africa).\nSerological analysis of O and K antigens was performed on 343 strains of Vibro parahaemolyticus isolated from clinical and environmental sources in Togo. Only two strains were"]]
["bb_dev_7", [" [CLS] Vibrio parahaemolyticus from clinical [CLS]  and environmental sources in Togo (West Africa).\nSerological analysis of O and K antigens was performed on 343 strains of Vibro parahaemolyticus isolated from clinical and environmental sources in"]]
["bb_dev_8", [" [CLS] Vibro parahaemolyticus isolated from clinical and environmental sources in Togo [CLS] . Only two strains were not typable by the available O antisera. K untypable strains were found in 4.8% of isolates from gastroenteritis patients, in 11% from healthy carriers, and", " [CLS] Vibro parahaemolyticus isolated from clinical and environmental sources in Togo. Only two strains were not typable by the available O antisera. K untypable strains were found in 4.8% of isolates from gastroenteritis patients, in 11% from healthy carriers, and in 47% and 46% of isolates, respectively, from water and fish samples. Thirteen serotypes identified in Togo [CLS]  are not considered in the Japanese antigenic scheme. The suitability of the Japanese typing scheme for geographic areas outside of Japan is discussed and its extension is suggested.\n"]]
["bb_dev_9", [" [CLS] Vibro parahaemolyticus isolated from clinical [CLS]  and environmental sources in Togo. Only two strains were not typable by the available O antisera. K untypable strains were found in 4.8% of isolates from gastroenteritis patients, in", " [CLS] Vibro parahaemolyticus isolated from clinical and environmental sources in Togo. Only two strains were not typable by the available O antisera. K untypable strains were found in 4.8% of isolates from gastroenteritis patients, in 11% from healthy carriers [CLS] , and in 47% and 46% of isolates, respectively, from water and fish samples. Thirteen serotypes identified in Togo are not considered in the Japanese antigenic scheme. The suitability of", " [CLS] Vibro parahaemolyticus isolated from clinical and environmental sources in Togo. Only two strains were not typable by the available O antisera. K untypable strains were found in 4.8% of isolates from gastroenteritis patients, in 11% from healthy carriers, and in 47% and 46% of isolates, respectively, from water and fish samples [CLS] . Thirteen serotypes identified in Togo are not considered in the Japanese antigenic scheme. The suitability of the Japanese typing scheme for geographic areas outside of Japan is discussed and", " [CLS] Vibro parahaemolyticus isolated from clinical and environmental sources in Togo. Only two strains were not typable by the available O antisera. K untypable strains were found in 4.8% of isolates from gastroenteritis patients [CLS] , in 11% from healthy carriers, and in 47% and 46% of isolates, respectively, from water and fish samples. Thirteen serotypes identified in Togo are not considered in the Japanese", " [CLS] Vibro parahaemolyticus isolated from clinical and environmental sources in Togo. Only two strains were not typable by the available O antisera. K untypable strains were found in 4.8% of isolates from gastroenteritis patients, in 11% from healthy carriers, and in 47% and 46% of isolates, respectively, from water [CLS]  and fish samples. Thirteen serotypes identified in Togo are not considered in the Japanese antigenic scheme. The suitability of the Japanese typing scheme for geographic areas outside of Japan"]]
["bb_dev_10", [" [CLS] tick spotted fever group [CLS]  Rickettsia isolates from Israel: a genotypic analysis.\nThe genomes of spotted fever group rickettsiae isolated in different geographical areas of Israel (two from ticks and four from humans, obtained", " [CLS] Human and tick spotted fever group [CLS]  Rickettsia isolates from Israel: a genotypic analysis.\nThe genomes of spotted fever group rickettsiae isolated in different geographical areas of Israel (two from ticks and four from humans, obtained", " the 190-kDa gene-derived primer sets were digested. All of the Israeli isolates were identical by RFLP analysis using all of the primer sets. This study showed that the Israeli  [CLS] spotted fever group isolates (from both ticks [CLS]  and humans) were genetically homogeneous by the criteria used in this study, despite the time and location differences in their original isolation, and different as a group from R.", " the 190-kDa gene-derived primer sets were digested. All of the Israeli isolates were identical by RFLP analysis using all of the primer sets. This study showed that the Israeli  [CLS] spotted fever group isolates (from both ticks and humans [CLS] ) were genetically homogeneous by the criteria used in this study, despite the time and location differences in their original isolation, and different as a group from R. conorii.\n"]]
["bb_dev_11", [" [CLS] Human and tick spotted fever group Rickettsia [CLS]  isolates from Israel: a genotypic analysis.\nThe genomes of spotted fever group rickettsiae isolated in different geographical areas of Israel (two from ticks and four from humans, obtained over", " [CLS] tick spotted fever group Rickettsia [CLS]  isolates from Israel: a genotypic analysis.\nThe genomes of spotted fever group rickettsiae isolated in different geographical areas of Israel (two from ticks and four from humans, obtained over"]]
["bb_dev_12", [" [CLS] Rickettsia isolates from Israel [CLS] : a genotypic analysis.\nThe genomes of spotted fever group rickettsiae isolated in different geographical areas of Israel (two from ticks and four from humans, obtained over a span of", " [CLS] Rickettsia infection in five areas of the state of S\u00e3o Paulo [CLS] , Brazil.\nThis study investigated rickettsial infection in animals, humans, ticks, and fleas collected in five areas of the state of S\u00e3o Paulo. Eight flea species (Adoratopsylla antiquorum antiquorum, Ctenocephalides", " [CLS] Rickettsia infection in five areas of the state of S\u00e3o Paulo, Brazil [CLS] .\nThis study investigated rickettsial infection in animals, humans, ticks, and fleas collected in five areas of the state of S\u00e3o Paulo. Eight flea species (Adoratopsylla antiquorum antiquorum, Ctenocephalides felis"]]
["bb_dev_13", [" [CLS] rickettsiae isolated in different geographical areas of Israel (two from ticks and four from humans [CLS] , obtained over a span of 20 years) were studied by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and restriction endonuclease fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis. The human isolates were obtained from patients", " [CLS] rickettsiae isolated in different geographical areas of Israel (two from ticks and four from humans, obtained over a span of 20 years) were studied by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and restriction endonuclease fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis. The human isolates were obtained from patients suffering from rickettsial disease of different degrees of severity [CLS] . The PCR products obtained with five pairs of oligonucleotide primers (two primer sets derived from the 190-kDa polypeptide gene and three from the 120-kDa polypeptide gene) and cleaved with", " [CLS] rickettsiae isolated in different geographical areas of Israel (two from ticks [CLS]  and four from humans, obtained over a span of 20 years) were studied by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and restriction endonuclease fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis. The human isolates"]]
["bb_dev_14", [" [CLS] rickettsiae isolated in different geographical areas of Israel (two from ticks and four from humans, obtained over a span of 20 years) were studied by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and restriction endonuclease fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis. The human isolates were obtained from patients suffering from rickettsial disease of different degrees of severity. The PCR products obtained with five pairs of oligonucleotide primers (two primer sets derived from the 190-kDa polypeptide gene and three from the 120-kDa polypeptide gene) and cleaved with restriction endonucleases were used to study the Israeli [CLS]  isolates and reference Rickettsia conorii isolates. Subtle differences between the PCR-RFLP patterns of Israeli isolates and the two R. conorii reference strains (Moroccan and no. 7) were seen when", " [CLS] rickettsiae isolated in different geographical areas of Israel [CLS]  (two from ticks and four from humans, obtained over a span of 20 years) were studied by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and restriction endonuclease fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis.", " [CLS] rickettsiae isolated in different geographical areas of Israel (two from ticks and four from humans, obtained over a span of 20 years) were studied by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and restriction endonuclease fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis. The human isolates were obtained from patients suffering from rickettsial disease of different degrees of severity. The PCR products obtained with five pairs of oligonucleotide primers (two primer sets derived from the 190-kDa polypeptide gene and three from the 120-kDa polypeptide gene) and cleaved with restriction endonucleases were used to study the Israeli isolates and reference Rickettsia conorii isolates. Subtle differences between the PCR-RFLP patterns of Israeli isolates and the two R. conorii reference strains (Moroccan and no. 7) were seen when the PCR products derived from the 190-kDa gene-derived primer sets were digested. All of the Israeli [CLS]  isolates were identical by RFLP analysis using all of the primer sets. This study showed that the Israeli spotted fever group isolates (from both ticks and humans) were genetically", " [CLS] rickettsiae isolated in different geographical areas of Israel (two from ticks and four from humans, obtained over a span of 20 years) were studied by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and restriction endonuclease fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis. The human isolates were obtained from patients suffering from rickettsial disease of different degrees of severity. The PCR products obtained with five pairs of oligonucleotide primers (two primer sets derived from the 190-kDa polypeptide gene and three from the 120-kDa polypeptide gene) and cleaved with restriction endonucleases were used to study the Israeli isolates and reference Rickettsia conorii isolates. Subtle differences between the PCR-RFLP patterns of Israeli [CLS]  isolates and the two R. conorii reference strains (Moroccan and no. 7) were seen when the PCR products derived from the 190-kDa gene-derived primer sets were digested. All of"]]
["bb_dev_15", [" from the 190-kDa gene-derived primer sets were digested. All of the Israeli isolates were identical by RFLP analysis using all of the primer sets. This study showed that the  [CLS] Israeli spotted fever group [CLS]  isolates (from both ticks and humans) were genetically homogeneous by the criteria used in this study, despite the time and location differences in their original isolation, and different as"]]
["bb_dev_16", [" [CLS] Bacillus thuringiensis serovar sotto strain isolated from Okinawa, Japan [CLS] .\nTo characterize the mosquitocidal activity of parasporal inclusions of the Bacillus thuringiensis serovar sotto strain 96-OK-85-24, for comparison with two well-characterized mosquitocidal strains.\nThe strain 96-OK-85-24 significantly differed from", " [CLS] Bacillus thuringiensis serovar sotto strain isolated from Okinawa [CLS] , Japan.\nTo characterize the mosquitocidal activity of parasporal inclusions of the Bacillus thuringiensis serovar sotto strain 96-OK-85-24, for comparison with two well-characterized mosquitocidal strains.\nThe strain 96-OK-85-24 significantly differed"]]
["bb_dev_17", [" [CLS] mosquitocidal Bacillus thuringiensis serovar sotto [CLS]  strain isolated from Okinawa, Japan.\nTo characterize the mosquitocidal activity of parasporal inclusions of the Bacillus thuringiensis serovar sotto strain 96-OK-85-24, for comparison with two well-characterized mosquitocidal strains.\nThe"]]
["bb_dev_18", [" [CLS] mosquitocidal activity of parasporal inclusions of the Bacillus thuringiensis serovar sotto strain 96-OK-85-24 [CLS] , for comparison with two well-characterized mosquitocidal strains.\nThe strain 96-OK-85-24 significantly differed from the existing mosquitocidal B. thuringiensis strains in: (1) lacking the larvicidal activity against Culex pipiens molestus"]]
["bb_dev_19", [" mosquitocidal activity of parasporal inclusions of the Bacillus thuringiensis serovar sotto strain 96-OK-85-24, for comparison with two well-characterized mosquitocidal strains.\nThe strain 96-OK-85-24 significantly differed from the existing mosquitocidal  [CLS] B. thuringiensis strains in: (1) lacking the larvicidal activity against Culex pipiens molestus [CLS]  and haemolytic activity, and (2) SDS-PAGE profiles, immunological properties and N-terminal amino acid sequences of parasporal inclusion proteins.\nIt is clear from the results that the strain 96-OK-85-24 synthesizes"]]
["bb_dev_20", [" the mosquitocidal activity of parasporal inclusions of the Bacillus thuringiensis serovar sotto strain 96-OK-85-24, for comparison with two well-characterized mosquitocidal strains.\nThe strain 96-OK-85-24 significantly differed from the existing  [CLS] mosquitocidal B. thuringiensis [CLS]  strains in: (1) lacking the larvicidal activity against Culex pipiens molestus and haemolytic activity, and (2) SDS-PAGE profiles, immunological properties and N-terminal amino acid sequences of parasporal inclusion proteins.", " clear from the results that the strain 96-OK-85-24 synthesizes a novel mosquitocidal Cry protein with a unique toxicity spectrum.\nThis is the first report of the occurrence of a  [CLS] mosquitocidal B. thuringiensis [CLS]  strain with an unusual toxicity spectrum, lacking the activity against the culicine mosquito.\n\n"]]
["bb_dev_21", [" pipiens molestus and haemolytic activity, and (2) SDS-PAGE profiles, immunological properties and N-terminal amino acid sequences of parasporal inclusion proteins.\nIt is clear from the results that the strain  [CLS] 96-OK-85-24 synthesizes a novel mosquitocidal [CLS]  Cry protein with a unique toxicity spectrum.\nThis is the first report of the occurrence of a mosquitocidal B. thuringiensis strain with an unusual toxicity spectrum, lacking the activity"]]
["bb_dev_22", [" [CLS] Pseudomonas aeruginosa in paediatric and adult cystic fibrosis units [CLS] .\nDespite recent reports of clonal strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in cystic fibrosis (CF) units, the need for routine microbiological surveillance remains contentious. Sputum was collected prospectively from productive patients", " [CLS] Pseudomonas aeruginosa in paediatric and adult cystic fibrosis units [CLS] .\nDespite recent reports of clonal strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in cystic fibrosis (CF) units, the need for routine microbiological surveillance remains contentious. Sputum was collected prospectively from productive patients", " [CLS] Pseudomonas aeruginosa in cystic fibrosis (CF) units [CLS] , the need for routine microbiological surveillance remains contentious. Sputum was collected prospectively from productive patients attending the regional paediatric and adult CF units in Brisbane, Australia. All P. aeruginosa"]]
["bb_dev_23", [" fibrosis units.\nDespite recent reports of clonal strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in cystic fibrosis (CF) units, the need for routine microbiological surveillance remains contentious. Sputum was collected prospectively from  [CLS] productive patients attending the regional paediatric and adult CF units in Brisbane, Australia. All P. aeruginosa [CLS]  isolates were typed using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. Spirometry, anthropometrics, hospitalisations and antibiotic sensitivity data were recorded. The first 100 sputum samples (first 50 patients at each clinic) harboured 163", " in paediatric and adult cystic fibrosis units.\nDespite recent reports of clonal strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in cystic fibrosis (CF) units, the need for routine microbiological surveillance remains contentious.  [CLS] Sputum was collected prospectively from productive patients attending the regional paediatric and adult CF units in Brisbane, Australia. All P. aeruginosa [CLS]  isolates were typed using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. Spirometry, anthropometrics, hospitalisations and antibiotic sensitivity data were recorded. The first 100 sputum samples (first 50 patients at each clinic) harboured 163", " typed using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. Spirometry, anthropometrics, hospitalisations and antibiotic sensitivity data were recorded. The first 100 sputum samples (first 50 patients at each clinic) harboured 163 isolates of  [CLS] P. aeruginosa. A total of 39 patients [CLS]  shared a common strain (pulsotype 2), 20 patients shared a strain with at least one other patient and 41 patients harboured unique strains. Eight patients shared a strain identical", " typed using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. Spirometry, anthropometrics, hospitalisations and antibiotic sensitivity data were recorded. The first 100 sputum samples (first 50 patients at each clinic) harboured 163 isolates of  [CLS] P. aeruginosa. A total of 39 patients shared a common strain (pulsotype 2), 20 patients shared a strain with at least one other patient and 41 patients harboured unique strains. Eight patients [CLS]  shared a strain identical to a previously reported Australian transmissible strain (pulsotype 1). Compared with the unique strain group, patients harbouring pulsotype 2 were younger and had poorer lung", " typed using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. Spirometry, anthropometrics, hospitalisations and antibiotic sensitivity data were recorded. The first 100 sputum samples (first 50 patients at each clinic) harboured 163 isolates of  [CLS] P. aeruginosa. A total of 39 patients shared a common strain (pulsotype 2), 20 patients shared a strain with at least one other patient [CLS]  and 41 patients harboured unique strains. Eight patients shared a strain identical to a previously reported Australian transmissible strain (pulsotype 1). Compared with the unique strain group, patients harbouring", " typed using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. Spirometry, anthropometrics, hospitalisations and antibiotic sensitivity data were recorded. The first 100 sputum samples (first 50 patients at each clinic) harboured 163 isolates of  [CLS] P. aeruginosa. A total of 39 patients shared a common strain (pulsotype 2), 20 patients shared a strain with at least one other patient and 41 patients harboured unique strains. Eight patients shared a strain identical to a previously reported Australian transmissible strain (pulsotype 1). Compared with the unique strain group, patients harbouring pulsotype 2 were younger and had poorer lung function. Treatment requirements were similar in these two groups, as were the rates of multiresistance. In conclusion, 59% of patients [CLS]  harboured a clonal strain, supporting the need for routine microbiological surveillance. In contrast to previously described clonal strains, the dominant pulsotype was indistinguishable from nonclonal strains with respect to", " typed using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. Spirometry, anthropometrics, hospitalisations and antibiotic sensitivity data were recorded. The first 100 sputum samples (first 50 patients at each clinic) harboured 163 isolates of  [CLS] P. aeruginosa. A total of 39 patients shared a common strain (pulsotype 2), 20 patients [CLS]  shared a strain with at least one other patient and 41 patients harboured unique strains. Eight patients shared a strain identical to a previously reported Australian transmissible strain (pulsotype", " and adult CF units in Brisbane, Australia. All P. aeruginosa isolates were typed using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. Spirometry, anthropometrics, hospitalisations and antibiotic sensitivity data were recorded. The first 100  [CLS] sputum samples (first 50 patients at each clinic) harboured 163 isolates of P. aeruginosa [CLS] . A total of 39 patients shared a common strain (pulsotype 2), 20 patients shared a strain with at least one other patient and 41 patients harboured unique strains. Eight", " typed using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. Spirometry, anthropometrics, hospitalisations and antibiotic sensitivity data were recorded. The first 100 sputum samples (first 50 patients at each clinic) harboured 163 isolates of  [CLS] P. aeruginosa. A total of 39 patients shared a common strain (pulsotype 2), 20 patients shared a strain with at least one other patient and 41 patients harboured unique strains. Eight patients shared a strain identical to a previously reported Australian transmissible strain (pulsotype 1). Compared with the unique strain group, patients [CLS]  harbouring pulsotype 2 were younger and had poorer lung function. Treatment requirements were similar in these two groups, as were the rates of multiresistance. In conclusion, 59% of patients", " in Brisbane, Australia. All P. aeruginosa isolates were typed using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. Spirometry, anthropometrics, hospitalisations and antibiotic sensitivity data were recorded. The first 100 sputum samples (first 50  [CLS] patients at each clinic) harboured 163 isolates of P. aeruginosa [CLS] . A total of 39 patients shared a common strain (pulsotype 2), 20 patients shared a strain with at least one other patient and 41 patients harboured unique strains. Eight", " typed using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. Spirometry, anthropometrics, hospitalisations and antibiotic sensitivity data were recorded. The first 100 sputum samples (first 50 patients at each clinic) harboured 163 isolates of  [CLS] P. aeruginosa. A total of 39 patients shared a common strain (pulsotype 2), 20 patients shared a strain with at least one other patient and 41 patients [CLS]  harboured unique strains. Eight patients shared a strain identical to a previously reported Australian transmissible strain (pulsotype 1). Compared with the unique strain group, patients harbouring pulsotype 2 were"]]
["bb_dev_24", [" cystic fibrosis (CF) units, the need for routine microbiological surveillance remains contentious. Sputum was collected prospectively from productive patients attending the regional paediatric and adult CF units in Brisbane,  [CLS] Australia. All P. aeruginosa [CLS]  isolates were typed using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. Spirometry, anthropometrics, hospitalisations and antibiotic sensitivity data were recorded. The first 100 sputum samples (first 50 patients at each clinic) harboured 163", " in cystic fibrosis (CF) units, the need for routine microbiological surveillance remains contentious. Sputum was collected prospectively from productive patients attending the regional paediatric and adult CF units in  [CLS] Brisbane, Australia. All P. aeruginosa [CLS]  isolates were typed using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. Spirometry, anthropometrics, hospitalisations and antibiotic sensitivity data were recorded. The first 100 sputum samples (first 50 patients at each clinic) harboured 163"]]
["bb_dev_25", [" typed using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. Spirometry, anthropometrics, hospitalisations and antibiotic sensitivity data were recorded. The first 100 sputum samples (first 50 patients at each clinic) harboured 163 isolates of  [CLS] P. aeruginosa. A total of 39 patients shared a common strain (pulsotype 2), 20 patients shared a strain with at least one other patient and 41 patients harboured unique strains. Eight patients shared a strain identical to a previously reported Australian transmissible strain (pulsotype 1). Compared with the unique strain group, patients harbouring pulsotype 2 were younger and had poorer lung function. Treatment requirements were similar in these two groups, as were the rates of multiresistance [CLS] . In conclusion, 59% of patients harboured a clonal strain, supporting the need for routine microbiological surveillance. In contrast to previously described clonal strains, the dominant pulsotype was indistinguishable from"]]
["bb_dev_26", [" 3.5 per million but equal to or greater than 2.5 per million at 6 weeks after treatment (odds ratio 2.28; 95% CI 1.17-4.44; P = 0.028).\nThe prevalence of  [CLS] H. pylori infection in dyspeptic patients in Yemen is very high, the eradication rate with standard triple therapy was unsatisfactory probably because of widespread bacterial resistance due to unrestricted antibiotic use [CLS] . The recurrence rate of infection at 1 year was high, as a result of recrudescence of incompletely eradicated organisms rather than reinfection.\n\n"]]
["bb_dev_27", ["\nRecurrent pregnancy loss is a disease of grave psychological and economic concern. The etiology in the vast majority of the cases is unknown or at best poorly understood. Although  [CLS] Klebsiella pneumonia infections have been reported in humans [CLS]  and animals during pregnancy, there is hardly any information to indicate whether or not these infections may be responsible for early pregnancy loss. We present a review of literature", "\nRecurrent pregnancy loss is a disease of grave psychological and economic concern. The etiology in the vast majority of the cases is unknown or at best poorly understood. Although  [CLS] Klebsiella pneumonia infections have been reported in humans and animals [CLS]  during pregnancy, there is hardly any information to indicate whether or not these infections may be responsible for early pregnancy loss. We present a review of literature and report", " any information to indicate whether or not these infections may be responsible for early pregnancy loss. We present a review of literature and report for the first time in  [CLS] humans, Klebsiella pneumonia [CLS]  infection in placenta of a 38-year-old secondary recurrent aborter (parity 2 + 3).\n\n", " information to indicate whether or not these infections may be responsible for early pregnancy loss. We present a review of literature and report for the first time in humans,  [CLS] Klebsiella pneumonia infection in placenta of a 38-year-old secondary recurrent aborter [CLS]  (parity 2 + 3).\n\n", " information to indicate whether or not these infections may be responsible for early pregnancy loss. We present a review of literature and report for the first time in humans,  [CLS] Klebsiella pneumonia infection in placenta of a 38-year-old secondary recurrent aborter [CLS]  (parity 2 + 3).\n\n"]]
["bb_dev_28", [" NCCLS recommendations.\nOf those with diarrhea, 40.9% were less than one year old and 71.0% were less than two years old. A potential pathogen was identified in 67.3% of  [CLS] children with diarrhea. They were group A rotavirus [CLS] , diarrheagenic Escherichia coli, Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis, with prevalences of 46.7%, 22.5%, 4.7%, and 7.3%, respectively. No Salmonella spp or Vibrio cholerae were isolated. Rotavirus and diarrheagenic"]]
["bb_dev_29", [" NCCLS recommendations.\nOf those with diarrhea, 40.9% were less than one year old and 71.0% were less than two years old. A potential pathogen was identified in 67.3% of  [CLS] children with diarrhea. They were group A rotavirus, diarrheagenic Escherichia coli [CLS] , Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis, with prevalences of 46.7%, 22.5%, 4.7%, and 7.3%, respectively. No Salmonella spp or Vibrio cholerae were isolated. Rotavirus and diarrheagenic E. coli were", " the children; (iv) families where mothers had a low level of education; (v) families where information on health and sanitation less often reached their households.\nGroup A rotavirus, diarrheagenic  [CLS] Escherichia coli, Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis play an important role in causing diarrhea in children [CLS]  in Hanoi, Vietnam. Epidemiological factors such as lack of fresh water supply, unhygienic septic tank, low family income, lack of health information, and low educational level of parents could", " [CLS] human pathogens: Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli [CLS] . The active compounds inhibited selectively S. aureus. The most active compounds amongst them were those with medium size aliphatic chain and aromatic MAGs with electron withdrawing substituents at the", " [CLS] Escherichia coli cells which are highly concentrated on cellophane membrane disks [CLS]  replicate efficiently endogenous M-13 duplex DNA. If the reaction is carried out in the presence of bromodeoxyuridine triphosphate, the majority of the label is found in two classes of"]]
["bb_dev_30", [" less than one year old and 71.0% were less than two years old. A potential pathogen was identified in 67.3% of children with diarrhea. They were group A rotavirus,  [CLS] diarrheagenic Escherichia coli [CLS] , Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis, with prevalences of 46.7%, 22.5%, 4.7%, and 7.3%, respectively. No Salmonella spp or Vibrio cholerae were isolated. Rotavirus and diarrheagenic E. coli were", " feeding the children; (iv) families where mothers had a low level of education; (v) families where information on health and sanitation less often reached their households.\nGroup A rotavirus,  [CLS] diarrheagenic Escherichia coli [CLS] , Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis play an important role in causing diarrhea in children in Hanoi, Vietnam. Epidemiological factors such as lack of fresh water supply, unhygienic septic", " [CLS] human pathogens: Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli [CLS] . The active compounds inhibited selectively S. aureus. The most active compounds amongst them were those with medium size aliphatic chain and aromatic MAGs with electron withdrawing substituents at the", " This greater permeability of the H. influenzae cell to penicillins appeared to reduce the protective effect of its beta-lactamase, in that acquisition of the TEM-type beta-lactamase increased levels of  [CLS] resistance to penicillins much less for individual cells of H. influenzae than for those of Escherichia coli [CLS] . Large inocula of either species appeared highly resistant. The unusually low level of resistance of individual cells of H. influenzae containing the TEM-type beta-lactamase may have delayed their emergence", " effect of its beta-lactamase, in that acquisition of the TEM-type beta-lactamase increased levels of resistance to penicillins much less for individual cells of H. influenzae than for those of  [CLS] Escherichia coli. Large inocula of either species appeared highly resistant [CLS] . The unusually low level of resistance of individual cells of H. influenzae containing the TEM-type beta-lactamase may have delayed their emergence or recognition, and has unresolved clinical implications.\n"]]
["bb_dev_31", [" NCCLS recommendations.\nOf those with diarrhea, 40.9% were less than one year old and 71.0% were less than two years old. A potential pathogen was identified in 67.3% of  [CLS] children with diarrhea. They were group A rotavirus, diarrheagenic Escherichia coli, Shigella spp [CLS] , and enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis, with prevalences of 46.7%, 22.5%, 4.7%, and 7.3%, respectively. No Salmonella spp or Vibrio cholerae were isolated. Rotavirus and diarrheagenic E. coli were predominant in", " 22.5%, 4.7%, and 7.3%, respectively. No Salmonella spp or Vibrio cholerae were isolated. Rotavirus and diarrheagenic E. coli were predominant in children less than two years of age, while  [CLS] Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic B. fragilis were mostly seen in the older children [CLS] . Diarrheagenic E. coli and Shigella spp showed high prevalence of resistance to ampicillin, chloramphenicol, and to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. Children attending the hospitals had fever (43.6%), vomiting (53.8%), and dehydration (82.6%).", " (iv) families where mothers had a low level of education; (v) families where information on health and sanitation less often reached their households.\nGroup A rotavirus, diarrheagenic Escherichia coli,  [CLS] Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis play an important role in causing diarrhea in children [CLS]  in Hanoi, Vietnam. Epidemiological factors such as lack of fresh water supply, unhygienic septic tank, low family income, lack of health information, and low educational level of parents could"]]
["bb_dev_32", [" NCCLS recommendations.\nOf those with diarrhea, 40.9% were less than one year old and 71.0% were less than two years old. A potential pathogen was identified in 67.3% of  [CLS] children with diarrhea. They were group A rotavirus, diarrheagenic Escherichia coli, Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis [CLS] , with prevalences of 46.7%, 22.5%, 4.7%, and 7.3%, respectively. No Salmonella spp or Vibrio cholerae were isolated. Rotavirus and diarrheagenic E. coli were predominant in children less than two", " had a low level of education; (v) families where information on health and sanitation less often reached their households.\nGroup A rotavirus, diarrheagenic Escherichia coli, Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic  [CLS] Bacteroides fragilis play an important role in causing diarrhea in children [CLS]  in Hanoi, Vietnam. Epidemiological factors such as lack of fresh water supply, unhygienic septic tank, low family income, lack of health information, and low educational level of parents could"]]
["bb_dev_33", [" 71.0% were less than two years old. A potential pathogen was identified in 67.3% of children with diarrhea. They were group A rotavirus, diarrheagenic Escherichia coli, Shigella spp, and  [CLS] enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis [CLS] , with prevalences of 46.7%, 22.5%, 4.7%, and 7.3%, respectively. No Salmonella spp or Vibrio cholerae were isolated. Rotavirus and diarrheagenic E. coli were predominant in children less than two", " mothers had a low level of education; (v) families where information on health and sanitation less often reached their households.\nGroup A rotavirus, diarrheagenic Escherichia coli, Shigella spp, and  [CLS] enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis [CLS]  play an important role in causing diarrhea in children in Hanoi, Vietnam. Epidemiological factors such as lack of fresh water supply, unhygienic septic tank, low family income, lack of"]]
["bb_dev_34", [" group A rotavirus, diarrheagenic Escherichia coli, Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis, with prevalences of 46.7%, 22.5%, 4.7%, and 7.3%, respectively. No Salmonella spp or Vibrio cholerae were isolated.  [CLS] Rotavirus and diarrheagenic E. coli were predominant in children less than two years of age [CLS] , while Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic B. fragilis were mostly seen in the older children. Diarrheagenic E. coli and Shigella spp showed high prevalence of resistance to ampicillin, chloramphenicol, and"]]
["bb_dev_35", [" diarrheagenic Escherichia coli, Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis, with prevalences of 46.7%, 22.5%, 4.7%, and 7.3%, respectively. No Salmonella spp or Vibrio cholerae were isolated. Rotavirus and diarrheagenic  [CLS] E. coli were predominant in children less than two years of age [CLS] , while Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic B. fragilis were mostly seen in the older children. Diarrheagenic E. coli and Shigella spp showed high prevalence of resistance to ampicillin, chloramphenicol, and"]]
["bb_dev_36", [" rotavirus, diarrheagenic Escherichia coli, Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis, with prevalences of 46.7%, 22.5%, 4.7%, and 7.3%, respectively. No Salmonella spp or Vibrio cholerae were isolated. Rotavirus and  [CLS] diarrheagenic E. coli [CLS]  were predominant in children less than two years of age, while Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic B. fragilis were mostly seen in the older children. Diarrheagenic E. coli and Shigella", " and diarrheagenic E. coli were predominant in children less than two years of age, while Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic B. fragilis were mostly seen in the older children. Diarrheagenic  [CLS] E. coli and Shigella spp showed high prevalence of resistance to ampicillin, chloramphenicol [CLS] , and to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. Children attending the hospitals had fever (43.6%), vomiting (53.8%), and dehydration (82.6%). Watery stool was predominant with a prevalence of 66.4%, followed by mucous stool (21.0%).", " and diarrheagenic E. coli were predominant in children less than two years of age, while Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic B. fragilis were mostly seen in the older children. Diarrheagenic  [CLS] E. coli and Shigella spp showed high prevalence of resistance to ampicillin [CLS] , chloramphenicol, and to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. Children attending the hospitals had fever (43.6%), vomiting (53.8%), and dehydration (82.6%). Watery stool was predominant with a prevalence of 66.4%, followed by mucous stool", " Rotavirus and diarrheagenic E. coli were predominant in children less than two years of age, while Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic B. fragilis were mostly seen in the older children.  [CLS] Diarrheagenic E. coli [CLS]  and Shigella spp showed high prevalence of resistance to ampicillin, chloramphenicol, and to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. Children attending the hospitals had fever (43.6%), vomiting (53.8%), and dehydration (82.6%). Watery stool was", " and diarrheagenic E. coli were predominant in children less than two years of age, while Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic B. fragilis were mostly seen in the older children. Diarrheagenic  [CLS] E. coli and Shigella spp showed high prevalence of resistance to ampicillin, chloramphenicol, and to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole [CLS] . Children attending the hospitals had fever (43.6%), vomiting (53.8%), and dehydration (82.6%). Watery stool was predominant with a prevalence of 66.4%, followed by mucous stool (21.0%). The mean episodes"]]
["bb_dev_37", [" respectively. No Salmonella spp or Vibrio cholerae were isolated. Rotavirus and diarrheagenic E. coli were predominant in children less than two years of age, while Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic  [CLS] B. fragilis were mostly seen in the older children [CLS] . Diarrheagenic E. coli and Shigella spp showed high prevalence of resistance to ampicillin, chloramphenicol, and to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. Children attending the hospitals had fever (43.6%), vomiting (53.8%), and dehydration (82.6%)."]]
["bb_dev_38", [" 7.3%, respectively. No Salmonella spp or Vibrio cholerae were isolated. Rotavirus and diarrheagenic E. coli were predominant in children less than two years of age, while Shigella spp, and  [CLS] enterotoxigenic B. fragilis [CLS]  were mostly seen in the older children. Diarrheagenic E. coli and Shigella spp showed high prevalence of resistance to ampicillin, chloramphenicol, and to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. Children attending the hospitals had"]]
["bb_dev_39", [" coli were predominant in children less than two years of age, while Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic B. fragilis were mostly seen in the older children. Diarrheagenic E. coli and  [CLS] Shigella spp showed high prevalence of resistance to ampicillin, chloramphenicol, and to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole [CLS] . Children attending the hospitals had fever (43.6%), vomiting (53.8%), and dehydration (82.6%). Watery stool was predominant with a prevalence of 66.4%, followed by mucous stool (21.0%). The mean episodes", " coli were predominant in children less than two years of age, while Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic B. fragilis were mostly seen in the older children. Diarrheagenic E. coli and  [CLS] Shigella spp showed high prevalence of resistance to ampicillin [CLS] , chloramphenicol, and to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. Children attending the hospitals had fever (43.6%), vomiting (53.8%), and dehydration (82.6%). Watery stool was predominant with a prevalence of 66.4%, followed by mucous stool", " coli were predominant in children less than two years of age, while Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic B. fragilis were mostly seen in the older children. Diarrheagenic E. coli and  [CLS] Shigella spp showed high prevalence of resistance to ampicillin, chloramphenicol [CLS] , and to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. Children attending the hospitals had fever (43.6%), vomiting (53.8%), and dehydration (82.6%). Watery stool was predominant with a prevalence of 66.4%, followed by mucous stool (21.0%)."]]
["bb_dev_40", [" less often before feeding the children; (iv) families where mothers had a low level of education; (v) families where information on health and sanitation less often reached their households.\n [CLS] Group A rotavirus, diarrheagenic Escherichia coli, Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis play an important role in causing diarrhea in children in Hanoi, Vietnam [CLS] . Epidemiological factors such as lack of fresh water supply, unhygienic septic tank, low family income, lack of health information, and low educational level of parents could contribute to the", " less often before feeding the children; (iv) families where mothers had a low level of education; (v) families where information on health and sanitation less often reached their households.\n [CLS] Group A rotavirus, diarrheagenic Escherichia coli, Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis play an important role in causing diarrhea in children in Hanoi [CLS] , Vietnam. Epidemiological factors such as lack of fresh water supply, unhygienic septic tank, low family income, lack of health information, and low educational level of parents could contribute to"]]
["bb_dev_41", [" less often before feeding the children; (iv) families where mothers had a low level of education; (v) families where information on health and sanitation less often reached their households.\n [CLS] Group A rotavirus, diarrheagenic Escherichia coli, Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis play an important role in causing diarrhea in children [CLS]  in Hanoi, Vietnam. Epidemiological factors such as lack of fresh water supply, unhygienic septic tank, low family income, lack of health information, and low educational level of parents could"]]
["bb_dev_42", [" the children; (iv) families where mothers had a low level of education; (v) families where information on health and sanitation less often reached their households.\nGroup A rotavirus, diarrheagenic  [CLS] Escherichia coli, Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis play an important role in causing diarrhea in children in Hanoi, Vietnam [CLS] . Epidemiological factors such as lack of fresh water supply, unhygienic septic tank, low family income, lack of health information, and low educational level of parents could contribute to the", " the children; (iv) families where mothers had a low level of education; (v) families where information on health and sanitation less often reached their households.\nGroup A rotavirus, diarrheagenic  [CLS] Escherichia coli, Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis play an important role in causing diarrhea in children in Hanoi [CLS] , Vietnam. Epidemiological factors such as lack of fresh water supply, unhygienic septic tank, low family income, lack of health information, and low educational level of parents could contribute to"]]
["bb_dev_43", [" (iv) families where mothers had a low level of education; (v) families where information on health and sanitation less often reached their households.\nGroup A rotavirus, diarrheagenic Escherichia coli,  [CLS] Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis play an important role in causing diarrhea in children in Hanoi [CLS] , Vietnam. Epidemiological factors such as lack of fresh water supply, unhygienic septic tank, low family income, lack of health information, and low educational level of parents could contribute to", " (iv) families where mothers had a low level of education; (v) families where information on health and sanitation less often reached their households.\nGroup A rotavirus, diarrheagenic Escherichia coli,  [CLS] Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis play an important role in causing diarrhea in children in Hanoi, Vietnam [CLS] . Epidemiological factors such as lack of fresh water supply, unhygienic septic tank, low family income, lack of health information, and low educational level of parents could contribute to the"]]
["bb_dev_44", [" had a low level of education; (v) families where information on health and sanitation less often reached their households.\nGroup A rotavirus, diarrheagenic Escherichia coli, Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic  [CLS] Bacteroides fragilis play an important role in causing diarrhea in children in Hanoi, Vietnam [CLS] . Epidemiological factors such as lack of fresh water supply, unhygienic septic tank, low family income, lack of health information, and low educational level of parents could contribute to the", " had a low level of education; (v) families where information on health and sanitation less often reached their households.\nGroup A rotavirus, diarrheagenic Escherichia coli, Shigella spp, and enterotoxigenic  [CLS] Bacteroides fragilis play an important role in causing diarrhea in children in Hanoi [CLS] , Vietnam. Epidemiological factors such as lack of fresh water supply, unhygienic septic tank, low family income, lack of health information, and low educational level of parents could contribute to"]]
["bb_dev_45", [" [CLS] rickettsial infection in animals, humans, ticks [CLS] , and fleas collected in five areas of the state of S\u00e3o Paulo. Eight flea species (Adoratopsylla antiquorum antiquorum, Ctenocephalides felis felis, Polygenis atopus, Polygenis rimatus, Polygenis roberti roberti, Polygenis", " [CLS] rickettsial infection in animals [CLS] , humans, ticks, and fleas collected in five areas of the state of S\u00e3o Paulo. Eight flea species (Adoratopsylla antiquorum antiquorum, Ctenocephalides felis felis, Polygenis atopus, Polygenis rimatus, Polygenis roberti", " [CLS] rickettsial infection in animals, humans, ticks, and fleas [CLS]  collected in five areas of the state of S\u00e3o Paulo. Eight flea species (Adoratopsylla antiquorum antiquorum, Ctenocephalides felis felis, Polygenis atopus, Polygenis rimatus, Polygenis roberti roberti, Polygenis tripus, Rhopalopsyllus", " [CLS] rickettsial infection in animals, humans [CLS] , ticks, and fleas collected in five areas of the state of S\u00e3o Paulo. Eight flea species (Adoratopsylla antiquorum antiquorum, Ctenocephalides felis felis, Polygenis atopus, Polygenis rimatus, Polygenis roberti roberti,"]]
["bb_dev_46", [" [CLS] rickettsial infection in animals, humans, ticks, and fleas collected in five areas of the state of S\u00e3o Paulo [CLS] . Eight flea species (Adoratopsylla antiquorum antiquorum, Ctenocephalides felis felis, Polygenis atopus, Polygenis rimatus, Polygenis roberti roberti, Polygenis tripus, Rhopalopsyllus lugubris, and Rhopalopsyllus lutzi lutzi), and five tick species (Amblyomma"]]
["bb_dev_47", [" tripus, Rhopalopsyllus lugubris, and Rhopalopsyllus lutzi lutzi), and five tick species (Amblyomma aureolatum, Amblyomma cajennense, Amblyomma dubitatum, Ixodes loricatus, and Rhipicephalus sanguineus) were collected from dogs, cats, and opossums.  [CLS] Rickettsia felis was the only rickettsia found infecting fleas [CLS] , whereas Rickettsia bellii was the only agent infecting ticks, but no animal or human blood was shown to contain rickettsial DNA. Testing animal and human sera by indirect immunofluorescence"]]
["bb_dev_48", [" species (Amblyomma aureolatum, Amblyomma cajennense, Amblyomma dubitatum, Ixodes loricatus, and Rhipicephalus sanguineus) were collected from dogs, cats, and opossums. Rickettsia felis was the only rickettsia found infecting fleas, whereas  [CLS] Rickettsia bellii was the only agent infecting ticks [CLS] , but no animal or human blood was shown to contain rickettsial DNA. Testing animal and human sera by indirect immunofluorescence assay against four rickettsia antigens (R. rickettsii, R. parkeri,"]]
["bb_dev_49", [" shown to contain rickettsial DNA. Testing animal and human sera by indirect immunofluorescence assay against four rickettsia antigens (R. rickettsii, R. parkeri, R. felis, and R. bellii), some opossum,  [CLS] dog, horse, and human sera reacted to R. rickettsii [CLS]  with titers at least four-fold higher than to the other three rickettsial antigens. These sera were considered to have a predominant antibody response to R. rickettsii. Using the same", " to contain rickettsial DNA. Testing animal and human sera by indirect immunofluorescence assay against four rickettsia antigens (R. rickettsii, R. parkeri, R. felis, and R. bellii), some opossum, dog,  [CLS] horse, and human sera reacted to R. rickettsii [CLS]  with titers at least four-fold higher than to the other three rickettsial antigens. These sera were considered to have a predominant antibody response to R. rickettsii. Using the same", " was shown to contain rickettsial DNA. Testing animal and human sera by indirect immunofluorescence assay against four rickettsia antigens (R. rickettsii, R. parkeri, R. felis, and R. bellii), some  [CLS] opossum, dog, horse, and human sera reacted to R. rickettsii [CLS]  with titers at least four-fold higher than to the other three rickettsial antigens. These sera were considered to have a predominant antibody response to R. rickettsii. Using the same", " rickettsial DNA. Testing animal and human sera by indirect immunofluorescence assay against four rickettsia antigens (R. rickettsii, R. parkeri, R. felis, and R. bellii), some opossum, dog, horse, and  [CLS] human sera reacted to R. rickettsii [CLS]  with titers at least four-fold higher than to the other three rickettsial antigens. These sera were considered to have a predominant antibody response to R. rickettsii. Using the same", " rickettsii. Using the same criteria, opossum, dog, and horse sera showed predominant antibody response to R. parkeri or a very closely related genotype. Our serological results suggest that both  [CLS] R. rickettsii and R. parkeri infected animals and/or humans [CLS]  in the studied areas.\n\n", " rickettsii. Using the same criteria, opossum, dog, and horse sera showed predominant antibody response to R. parkeri or a very closely related genotype. Our serological results suggest that both  [CLS] R. rickettsii and R. parkeri infected animals [CLS]  and/or humans in the studied areas.\n\n"]]
["bb_dev_50", [" at least four-fold higher than to the other three rickettsial antigens. These sera were considered to have a predominant antibody response to R. rickettsii. Using the same criteria, opossum,  [CLS] dog, and horse sera showed predominant antibody response to R. parkeri [CLS]  or a very closely related genotype. Our serological results suggest that both R. rickettsii and R. parkeri infected animals and/or humans in the studied areas.\n\n", " four-fold higher than to the other three rickettsial antigens. These sera were considered to have a predominant antibody response to R. rickettsii. Using the same criteria, opossum, dog, and  [CLS] horse sera showed predominant antibody response to R. parkeri [CLS]  or a very closely related genotype. Our serological results suggest that both R. rickettsii and R. parkeri infected animals and/or humans in the studied areas.\n\n", " titers at least four-fold higher than to the other three rickettsial antigens. These sera were considered to have a predominant antibody response to R. rickettsii. Using the same criteria,  [CLS] opossum, dog, and horse sera showed predominant antibody response to R. parkeri [CLS]  or a very closely related genotype. Our serological results suggest that both R. rickettsii and R. parkeri infected animals and/or humans in the studied areas.\n\n", " same criteria, opossum, dog, and horse sera showed predominant antibody response to R. parkeri or a very closely related genotype. Our serological results suggest that both R. rickettsii and  [CLS] R. parkeri infected animals [CLS]  and/or humans in the studied areas.\n\n", " same criteria, opossum, dog, and horse sera showed predominant antibody response to R. parkeri or a very closely related genotype. Our serological results suggest that both R. rickettsii and  [CLS] R. parkeri infected animals and/or humans [CLS]  in the studied areas.\n\n"]]
["bb_dev_51", [" [CLS] Francisella tularensis in monocyte-like THP-1 cells [CLS] : interaction between surface nucleolin and bacterial elongation factor Tu.\nFrancisella tularensis, the causative agent of tularemia, is one of the most infectious human bacterial pathogens. It is phagocytosed by", " [CLS] Francisella tularensis, the causative agent of tularemia, is one of the most infectious human [CLS]  bacterial pathogens. It is phagocytosed by immune cells, such as monocytes and macrophages. The precise mechanisms that initiate bacterial uptake have not yet been elucidated. Participation of C3, CR3,", " either RGG domain of nucleolin or cell solubilized nucleolin.\nAltogether, our results demonstrate that the interaction between surface nucleolin and its bacterial ligand EF-Tu plays an important role in  [CLS] Francisella tularensis adhesion and entry process and may therefore facilitate invasion of host tissues [CLS] . Since phagosomal escape and intra-cytosolic multiplication of LVS in infected monocytes are very similar to those of human pathogenic F. tularensis ssp tularensis, the mechanism of entry into monocyte-like"]]
["bb_dev_52", [" [CLS] Francisella tularensis, the causative agent of tularemia, is one of the most infectious human bacterial pathogens [CLS] . It is phagocytosed by immune cells, such as monocytes and macrophages. The precise mechanisms that initiate bacterial uptake have not yet been elucidated. Participation of C3, CR3, class A", " [CLS] Francisella tularensis, the causative agent of tularemia [CLS] , is one of the most infectious human bacterial pathogens. It is phagocytosed by immune cells, such as monocytes and macrophages. The precise mechanisms that initiate bacterial uptake have not", " either RGG domain of nucleolin or cell solubilized nucleolin.\nAltogether, our results demonstrate that the interaction between surface nucleolin and its bacterial ligand EF-Tu plays an important role in  [CLS] Francisella tularensis adhesion [CLS]  and entry process and may therefore facilitate invasion of host tissues. Since phagosomal escape and intra-cytosolic multiplication of LVS in infected monocytes are very similar to those of human", " either RGG domain of nucleolin or cell solubilized nucleolin.\nAltogether, our results demonstrate that the interaction between surface nucleolin and its bacterial ligand EF-Tu plays an important role in  [CLS] Francisella tularensis adhesion and entry process and may therefore facilitate invasion of host tissues [CLS] . Since phagosomal escape and intra-cytosolic multiplication of LVS in infected monocytes are very similar to those of human pathogenic F. tularensis ssp tularensis, the mechanism of entry into monocyte-like"]]
["bb_dev_53", [" additional, as-yet-unidentified receptor for F. tularensis internalization has been suggested.\nWe show here that cell-surface expressed nucleolin is a receptor for Francisella tularensis Live Vaccine Strain (LVS) and promotes  [CLS] LVS binding and infection of human monocyte-like THP-1 cells [CLS] . The HB-19 pseudopeptide that binds specifically carboxy-terminal RGG domain of nucleolin inhibits LVS binding and infection of monocyte-like THP-1 cells. In a pull-down assay, elongation factor Tu (EF-Tu), a", " additional, as-yet-unidentified receptor for F. tularensis internalization has been suggested.\nWe show here that cell-surface expressed nucleolin is a receptor for Francisella tularensis Live Vaccine Strain (LVS) and promotes  [CLS] LVS binding and infection of human [CLS]  monocyte-like THP-1 cells. The HB-19 pseudopeptide that binds specifically carboxy-terminal RGG domain of nucleolin inhibits LVS binding and infection of monocyte-like THP-1 cells. In a pull-down assay, elongation factor", " Francisella tularensis Live Vaccine Strain (LVS) and promotes LVS binding and infection of human monocyte-like THP-1 cells. The HB-19 pseudopeptide that binds specifically carboxy-terminal RGG domain of nucleolin inhibits  [CLS] LVS binding and infection of monocyte-like THP-1 cells [CLS] . In a pull-down assay, elongation factor Tu (EF-Tu), a GTP-binding protein involved in protein translation, usually found in cytoplasm, was recovered among LVS bacterial membrane proteins bound on RGG", " bacterial ligand EF-Tu plays an important role in Francisella tularensis adhesion and entry process and may therefore facilitate invasion of host tissues. Since phagosomal escape and intra-cytosolic multiplication of  [CLS] LVS in infected monocytes [CLS]  are very similar to those of human pathogenic F. tularensis ssp tularensis, the mechanism of entry into monocyte-like THP-1 cells, involving interaction between EF-Tu and nucleolin, might be similar", " bacterial ligand EF-Tu plays an important role in Francisella tularensis adhesion and entry process and may therefore facilitate invasion of host tissues. Since phagosomal escape and intra-cytosolic multiplication of  [CLS] LVS in infected monocytes are very similar to those of human pathogenic F. tularensis ssp tularensis, the mechanism of entry into monocyte-like THP-1 cells [CLS] , involving interaction between EF-Tu and nucleolin, might be similar in the two subspecies. Thus, the use of either nucleolin-specific pseudopeptide HB-19 or recombinant EF-Tu could provide attractive therapeutic approaches"]]
["bb_dev_54", [" additional, as-yet-unidentified receptor for F. tularensis internalization has been suggested.\nWe show here that cell-surface expressed nucleolin is a receptor for Francisella tularensis Live Vaccine Strain (LVS) and promotes  [CLS] LVS binding [CLS]  and infection of human monocyte-like THP-1 cells. The HB-19 pseudopeptide that binds specifically carboxy-terminal RGG domain of nucleolin inhibits LVS binding and infection of monocyte-like THP-1 cells. In a", " Francisella tularensis Live Vaccine Strain (LVS) and promotes LVS binding and infection of human monocyte-like THP-1 cells. The HB-19 pseudopeptide that binds specifically carboxy-terminal RGG domain of nucleolin inhibits  [CLS] LVS binding [CLS]  and infection of monocyte-like THP-1 cells. In a pull-down assay, elongation factor Tu (EF-Tu), a GTP-binding protein involved in protein translation, usually found in cytoplasm, was recovered among LVS", " was raised against recombinant LVS EF-Tu. By fluorescence and electron microscopy experiments, we found that a fraction of EF-Tu could be detected at the bacterial surface. Anti-EF-Tu antibodies reduced  [CLS] LVS binding [CLS]  to monocyte-like THP-1 cells and impaired infection, even in absence of complement and complement receptors. Interaction between EF-Tu and nucleolin was illustrated by two different pull-down assays using recombinant"]]
["bb_dev_55", [" adhesion and entry process and may therefore facilitate invasion of host tissues. Since phagosomal escape and intra-cytosolic multiplication of LVS in infected monocytes are very similar to those of  [CLS] human pathogenic F. tularensis ssp tularensis [CLS] , the mechanism of entry into monocyte-like THP-1 cells, involving interaction between EF-Tu and nucleolin, might be similar in the two subspecies. Thus, the use of either nucleolin-specific pseudopeptide HB-19", " entry process and may therefore facilitate invasion of host tissues. Since phagosomal escape and intra-cytosolic multiplication of LVS in infected monocytes are very similar to those of human pathogenic  [CLS] F. tularensis ssp tularensis, the mechanism of entry into monocyte-like THP-1 cells [CLS] , involving interaction between EF-Tu and nucleolin, might be similar in the two subspecies. Thus, the use of either nucleolin-specific pseudopeptide HB-19 or recombinant EF-Tu could provide attractive therapeutic approaches"]]
["bb_dev_56", [" adhesion and entry process and may therefore facilitate invasion of host tissues. Since phagosomal escape and intra-cytosolic multiplication of LVS in infected monocytes are very similar to those of  [CLS] human pathogenic F. tularensis ssp tularensis [CLS] , the mechanism of entry into monocyte-like THP-1 cells, involving interaction between EF-Tu and nucleolin, might be similar in the two subspecies. Thus, the use of either nucleolin-specific pseudopeptide HB-19"]]
["bb_dev_57", [" [CLS] human pathogens: Staphylococcus aureus [CLS]  and Escherichia coli. The active compounds inhibited selectively S. aureus. The most active compounds amongst them were those with medium size aliphatic chain and aromatic MAGs with electron withdrawing"]]
["bb_dev_58", [" [CLS] human pathogens: Staphylococcus aureus [CLS]  and Escherichia coli. The active compounds inhibited selectively S. aureus. The most active compounds amongst them were those with medium size aliphatic chain and aromatic MAGs with electron withdrawing"]]
["bb_dev_59", [" of hexadecenoic acid and C-19 cyclopropane fatty acid. It is also a fact that the fatty acids associated with bile resistance depended on species, strain, and/or growth medium. In  [CLS] L. lactis subsp. cremoris strains grown in GM17 medium [CLS] , the bile-resistant strains had significantly more octadecenoic acid than the bile-sensitive strains. In LM17 medium, bile-resistant strains had significantly more octadecenoic acid and significantly less C-19 cyclopropane fatty acid", " of hexadecenoic acid and C-19 cyclopropane fatty acid. It is also a fact that the fatty acids associated with bile resistance depended on species, strain, and/or growth medium. In  [CLS] L. lactis subsp. cremoris strains grown in GM17 medium, the bile-resistant strains had significantly more octadecenoic acid than the bile-sensitive strains. In LM17 medium [CLS] , bile-resistant strains had significantly more octadecenoic acid and significantly less C-19 cyclopropane fatty acid than the bile-sensitive strains. In L. lactis subsp. lactis strains, bile resistances of some of"]]
["bb_dev_60", [" of hexadecenoic acid and C-19 cyclopropane fatty acid. It is also a fact that the fatty acids associated with bile resistance depended on species, strain, and/or growth medium. In  [CLS] L. lactis subsp. cremoris strains grown in GM17 medium, the bile-resistant [CLS]  strains had significantly more octadecenoic acid than the bile-sensitive strains. In LM17 medium, bile-resistant strains had significantly more octadecenoic acid and significantly less C-19 cyclopropane fatty acid than the", " of hexadecenoic acid and C-19 cyclopropane fatty acid. It is also a fact that the fatty acids associated with bile resistance depended on species, strain, and/or growth medium. In  [CLS] L. lactis subsp. cremoris strains grown in GM17 medium, the bile-resistant strains had significantly more octadecenoic acid than the bile-sensitive strains. In LM17 medium, bile-resistant strains had significantly more octadecenoic acid and significantly less C-19 cyclopropane fatty acid than the bile-sensitive [CLS]  strains. In L. lactis subsp. lactis strains, bile resistances of some of the tested strains were altered by growth medium. Some strains were resistant to bile in GM17 medium", " of hexadecenoic acid and C-19 cyclopropane fatty acid. It is also a fact that the fatty acids associated with bile resistance depended on species, strain, and/or growth medium. In  [CLS] L. lactis subsp. cremoris strains grown in GM17 medium, the bile-resistant strains had significantly more octadecenoic acid than the bile-sensitive strains. In LM17 medium, bile-resistant [CLS]  strains had significantly more octadecenoic acid and significantly less C-19 cyclopropane fatty acid than the bile-sensitive strains. In L. lactis subsp. lactis strains, bile resistances of some of the", " of hexadecenoic acid and C-19 cyclopropane fatty acid. It is also a fact that the fatty acids associated with bile resistance depended on species, strain, and/or growth medium. In  [CLS] L. lactis subsp. cremoris strains grown in GM17 medium, the bile-resistant strains had significantly more octadecenoic acid than the bile-sensitive [CLS]  strains. In LM17 medium, bile-resistant strains had significantly more octadecenoic acid and significantly less C-19 cyclopropane fatty acid than the bile-sensitive strains. In L. lactis subsp. lactis strains, bile"]]
["bb_dev_61", [" more octadecenoic acid than the bile-sensitive strains. In LM17 medium, bile-resistant strains had significantly more octadecenoic acid and significantly less C-19 cyclopropane fatty acid than the bile-sensitive strains. In  [CLS] L. lactis subsp. lactis strains, bile resistances of some of the tested strains were altered by growth medium. Some strains were resistant to bile in GM17 medium [CLS]  but sensitive to bile in LM17 medium. Some strains were resistant in both media tested. The strains grown in GM17 medium had significantly more hexadecanoic acid and octadecenoic acid,", " more octadecenoic acid than the bile-sensitive strains. In LM17 medium, bile-resistant strains had significantly more octadecenoic acid and significantly less C-19 cyclopropane fatty acid than the bile-sensitive strains. In  [CLS] L. lactis subsp. lactis strains, bile resistances of some of the tested strains were altered by growth medium. Some strains were resistant to bile in GM17 medium but sensitive to bile in LM17 medium [CLS] . Some strains were resistant in both media tested. The strains grown in GM17 medium had significantly more hexadecanoic acid and octadecenoic acid, and significantly less tetradecanoic acid, octadecadienoic acid"]]
["bb_dev_62", [" more octadecenoic acid than the bile-sensitive strains. In LM17 medium, bile-resistant strains had significantly more octadecenoic acid and significantly less C-19 cyclopropane fatty acid than the bile-sensitive strains. In  [CLS] L. lactis subsp. lactis strains, bile resistances of some of the tested strains were altered by growth medium. Some strains were resistant to bile in GM17 medium but sensitive to bile [CLS]  in LM17 medium. Some strains were resistant in both media tested. The strains grown in GM17 medium had significantly more hexadecanoic acid and octadecenoic acid, and significantly less tetradecanoic", " more octadecenoic acid than the bile-sensitive strains. In LM17 medium, bile-resistant strains had significantly more octadecenoic acid and significantly less C-19 cyclopropane fatty acid than the bile-sensitive strains. In  [CLS] L. lactis subsp. lactis strains, bile resistances [CLS]  of some of the tested strains were altered by growth medium. Some strains were resistant to bile in GM17 medium but sensitive to bile in LM17 medium. Some strains", " more octadecenoic acid than the bile-sensitive strains. In LM17 medium, bile-resistant strains had significantly more octadecenoic acid and significantly less C-19 cyclopropane fatty acid than the bile-sensitive strains. In  [CLS] L. lactis subsp. lactis strains, bile resistances of some of the tested strains were altered by growth medium. Some strains were resistant to bile in GM17 medium but sensitive to bile in LM17 medium. Some strains were resistant [CLS]  in both media tested. The strains grown in GM17 medium had significantly more hexadecanoic acid and octadecenoic acid, and significantly less tetradecanoic acid, octadecadienoic acid and C-19 cyclopropane fatty", " more octadecenoic acid than the bile-sensitive strains. In LM17 medium, bile-resistant strains had significantly more octadecenoic acid and significantly less C-19 cyclopropane fatty acid than the bile-sensitive strains. In  [CLS] L. lactis subsp. lactis strains, bile resistances of some of the tested strains were altered by growth medium. Some strains were resistant to bile [CLS]  in GM17 medium but sensitive to bile in LM17 medium. Some strains were resistant in both media tested. The strains grown in GM17 medium had significantly more hexadecanoic acid"]]
["bb_dev_63", [" acid, and significantly less tetradecanoic acid, octadecadienoic acid and C-19 cyclopropane fatty acid than the strains grown in LM17 medium. In conclusion, the fatty acid compositions of the bile-resistant  [CLS] lactococci differed from those of the bile-sensitive [CLS]  ones. More importantly, our data suggest that altering their fatty acid composition (i.e. increased hexadecanoic acid and octadecenoic acid and decreased hexadecenoic acid and C-19 cyclopropane fatty acid) by", " octadecenoic acid, and significantly less tetradecanoic acid, octadecadienoic acid and C-19 cyclopropane fatty acid than the strains grown in LM17 medium. In conclusion, the fatty acid compositions of the  [CLS] bile-resistant lactococci [CLS]  differed from those of the bile-sensitive ones. More importantly, our data suggest that altering their fatty acid composition (i.e. increased hexadecanoic acid and octadecenoic acid and decreased hexadecenoic acid", " composition (i.e. increased hexadecanoic acid and octadecenoic acid and decreased hexadecenoic acid and C-19 cyclopropane fatty acid) by changing growth conditions may be a useful way to enhance their  [CLS] bile resistance in lactococci [CLS] .\n\n"]]
["bb_dev_64", [" [CLS] thermotolerant Campylobacter [CLS]  in partridges (Perdix perdix).\nTo estimate the prevalence of thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. in commercially reared partridges (Perdix perdix) in southern Italy.\nCloacal swabs of partridges (n = 240), equally"]]
["bb_dev_65", [" [CLS] thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. [CLS]  in commercially reared partridges (Perdix perdix) in southern Italy.\nCloacal swabs of partridges (n = 240), equally distributed between male and female birds, from a game bird farm located", " swabs of partridges (n = 240), equally distributed between male and female birds, from a game bird farm located in the Southern Italy were examined for the prevalence of  [CLS] thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. [CLS]  The samples were processed in order to detect thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. by culture methods. The positive samples were then confirmed by multiplex polymerase chain reaction. Thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. were", " female birds, from a game bird farm located in the Southern Italy were examined for the prevalence of thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. The samples were processed in order to detect  [CLS] thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. [CLS]  by culture methods. The positive samples were then confirmed by multiplex polymerase chain reaction. Thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. were isolated from 118 (49.2%) of the 240 cloacal swabs examined. As", " of thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. The samples were processed in order to detect thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. by culture methods. The positive samples were then confirmed by multiplex polymerase chain reaction.  [CLS] Thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. [CLS]  were isolated from 118 (49.2%) of the 240 cloacal swabs examined. As proved by PCR, 100% of the strains were identified as Campylobacter coli (118/118), and 15 (12.7%) out"]]
["bb_dev_66", [" thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. The samples were processed in order to detect thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. by culture methods. The positive samples were then confirmed by multiplex polymerase chain reaction. Thermotolerant  [CLS] Campylobacter spp. were isolated from 118 (49.2%) of the 240 cloacal swabs examined. As proved by PCR, 100% of the strains were identified as Campylobacter coli (118/118), and 15 (12.7%) out of the 118 positive samples were also positive for Campylobacter jejuni. In contrast, Campylobacter lari was not identified. Adult partridges showed a significantly higher prevalence (P < 0.05) than younger ones [CLS] .\nThese results reinforce the assumption that game birds may be considered as potential carriers of Campylobacter spp. for human being and other animal species.\nAlthough an earlier 1986 publication", " thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. The samples were processed in order to detect thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. by culture methods. The positive samples were then confirmed by multiplex polymerase chain reaction. Thermotolerant  [CLS] Campylobacter spp. were isolated from 118 (49.2%) of the 240 cloacal swabs [CLS]  examined. As proved by PCR, 100% of the strains were identified as Campylobacter coli (118/118), and 15 (12.7%) out of the 118 positive samples were also positive for Campylobacter", " identified. Adult partridges showed a significantly higher prevalence (P < 0.05) than younger ones.\nThese results reinforce the assumption that game birds may be considered as potential carriers of  [CLS] Campylobacter spp. for human being [CLS]  and other animal species.\nAlthough an earlier 1986 publication described the prevalence of Campylobacter coli in commercially reared partridges, this is the first report to confirm the species of", " for Campylobacter jejuni. In contrast, Campylobacter lari was not identified. Adult partridges showed a significantly higher prevalence (P < 0.05) than younger ones.\nThese results reinforce the assumption that  [CLS] game birds may be considered as potential carriers of Campylobacter spp. [CLS]  for human being and other animal species.\nAlthough an earlier 1986 publication described the prevalence of Campylobacter coli in commercially reared partridges, this is the first report to confirm", " identified. Adult partridges showed a significantly higher prevalence (P < 0.05) than younger ones.\nThese results reinforce the assumption that game birds may be considered as potential carriers of  [CLS] Campylobacter spp. for human being and other animal species [CLS] .\nAlthough an earlier 1986 publication described the prevalence of Campylobacter coli in commercially reared partridges, this is the first report to confirm the species of Campylobacter using a PCR"]]
["bb_dev_67", [" reared partridges (Perdix perdix) in southern Italy.\nCloacal swabs of partridges (n = 240), equally distributed between male and female birds, from a game bird farm located in the  [CLS] Southern Italy were examined for the prevalence of thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. The samples were processed in order to detect thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. by culture methods. The positive samples were then confirmed by multiplex polymerase chain reaction. Thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. [CLS]  were isolated from 118 (49.2%) of the 240 cloacal swabs examined. As proved by PCR, 100% of the strains were identified as Campylobacter coli (118/118), and 15 (12.7%) out"]]
["bb_dev_68", [" multiplex polymerase chain reaction. Thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. were isolated from 118 (49.2%) of the 240 cloacal swabs examined. As proved by PCR, 100% of the strains were identified as  [CLS] Campylobacter coli (118/118), and 15 (12.7%) out of the 118 positive samples were also positive for Campylobacter jejuni. In contrast, Campylobacter lari was not identified. Adult partridges showed a significantly higher prevalence (P < 0.05) than younger ones [CLS] .\nThese results reinforce the assumption that game birds may be considered as potential carriers of Campylobacter spp. for human being and other animal species.\nAlthough an earlier 1986 publication", " multiplex polymerase chain reaction. Thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. were isolated from 118 (49.2%) of the 240 cloacal swabs examined. As proved by PCR, 100% of the strains were identified as  [CLS] Campylobacter coli (118/118), and 15 (12.7%) out of the 118 positive samples were also positive for Campylobacter jejuni. In contrast, Campylobacter lari was not identified. Adult partridges [CLS]  showed a significantly higher prevalence (P < 0.05) than younger ones.\nThese results reinforce the assumption that game birds may be considered as potential carriers of Campylobacter spp. for", " detect thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. by culture methods. The positive samples were then confirmed by multiplex polymerase chain reaction. Thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. were isolated from 118 (49.2%) of the 240  [CLS] cloacal swabs examined. As proved by PCR, 100% of the strains were identified as Campylobacter coli [CLS]  (118/118), and 15 (12.7%) out of the 118 positive samples were also positive for Campylobacter jejuni. In contrast, Campylobacter lari was not identified. Adult partridges showed a significantly higher", " assumption that game birds may be considered as potential carriers of Campylobacter spp. for human being and other animal species.\nAlthough an earlier 1986 publication described the prevalence of  [CLS] Campylobacter coli in commercially reared partridges [CLS] , this is the first report to confirm the species of Campylobacter using a PCR test.\n\n"]]
["bb_dev_69", [" reared partridges (Perdix perdix) in southern Italy.\nCloacal swabs of partridges (n = 240), equally distributed between male and female birds, from a game bird farm located in the  [CLS] Southern Italy were examined for the prevalence of thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. The samples were processed in order to detect thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. by culture methods. The positive samples were then confirmed by multiplex polymerase chain reaction. Thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. were isolated from 118 (49.2%) of the 240 cloacal swabs examined. As proved by PCR, 100% of the strains were identified as Campylobacter coli [CLS]  (118/118), and 15 (12.7%) out of the 118 positive samples were also positive for Campylobacter jejuni. In contrast, Campylobacter lari was not identified. Adult partridges showed a significantly higher"]]
["bb_dev_70", [" swabs examined. As proved by PCR, 100% of the strains were identified as Campylobacter coli (118/118), and 15 (12.7%) out of the 118 positive samples were also positive for  [CLS] Campylobacter jejuni. In contrast, Campylobacter lari was not identified. Adult partridges [CLS]  showed a significantly higher prevalence (P < 0.05) than younger ones.\nThese results reinforce the assumption that game birds may be considered as potential carriers of Campylobacter spp. for", " detect thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. by culture methods. The positive samples were then confirmed by multiplex polymerase chain reaction. Thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. were isolated from 118 (49.2%) of the 240  [CLS] cloacal swabs examined. As proved by PCR, 100% of the strains were identified as Campylobacter coli (118/118), and 15 (12.7%) out of the 118 positive samples were also positive for Campylobacter jejuni [CLS] . In contrast, Campylobacter lari was not identified. Adult partridges showed a significantly higher prevalence (P < 0.05) than younger ones.\nThese results reinforce the assumption that game birds may", " swabs examined. As proved by PCR, 100% of the strains were identified as Campylobacter coli (118/118), and 15 (12.7%) out of the 118 positive samples were also positive for  [CLS] Campylobacter jejuni. In contrast, Campylobacter lari was not identified. Adult partridges showed a significantly higher prevalence (P < 0.05) than younger ones [CLS] .\nThese results reinforce the assumption that game birds may be considered as potential carriers of Campylobacter spp. for human being and other animal species.\nAlthough an earlier 1986 publication"]]
["bb_dev_71", [" reared partridges (Perdix perdix) in southern Italy.\nCloacal swabs of partridges (n = 240), equally distributed between male and female birds, from a game bird farm located in the  [CLS] Southern Italy were examined for the prevalence of thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. The samples were processed in order to detect thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. by culture methods. The positive samples were then confirmed by multiplex polymerase chain reaction. Thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. were isolated from 118 (49.2%) of the 240 cloacal swabs examined. As proved by PCR, 100% of the strains were identified as Campylobacter coli (118/118), and 15 (12.7%) out of the 118 positive samples were also positive for Campylobacter jejuni [CLS] . In contrast, Campylobacter lari was not identified. Adult partridges showed a significantly higher prevalence (P < 0.05) than younger ones.\nThese results reinforce the assumption that game birds may"]]
["bb_dev_72", [" by the type III secretion system.\nThe human innate immune system relies on the coordinated activity of macrophages and polymorphonuclear leukocytes (neutrophils or PMNs) for defense against bacterial pathogens.  [CLS] Yersinia spp. subvert the innate immune response to cause disease in humans [CLS] . In particular, the Yersinia outer protein YopJ (Y. pestis and Y. pseudotuberculosis) and YopP (Y. enterocolitica) rapidly induce apoptosis in murine macrophages and dendritic cells. However, the effects of", " murine macrophages and dendritic cells. However, the effects of Yersinia Yop J/P on neutrophil fate are not clearly defined.\nIn this study, we utilized wild-type and mutant strains of  [CLS] Yersinia to test the contribution of YopJ and YopP on induction of apoptosis in human [CLS]  monocyte-derived macrophages (HMDM) and neutrophils. Whereas YopJ and YopP similarly induced apoptosis in HMDMs, interaction of human neutrophils with virulence plasmid-containing Yersinia did not result in PMN caspase activation,", " test the contribution of YopJ and YopP on induction of apoptosis in human monocyte-derived macrophages (HMDM) and neutrophils. Whereas YopJ and YopP similarly induced apoptosis in HMDMs, interaction of  [CLS] human neutrophils with virulence plasmid-containing Yersinia [CLS]  did not result in PMN caspase activation, release of LDH, or loss of membrane integrity greater than PMN controls. In contrast, interaction of human PMNs with the virulence plasmid-deficient", " YopP did not induce pronounced apoptosis in human neutrophils. Furthermore, robust PMN ROS production in response to virulence plasmid-deficient Yersinia was associated with increased PMN cell death, suggesting that  [CLS] Yersinia inhibition of PMN ROS production plays a role in evasion of the human [CLS]  innate immune response in part by limiting PMN apoptosis.\n\n"]]
["bb_dev_73", [" cell death by the type III secretion system.\nThe human innate immune system relies on the coordinated activity of macrophages and polymorphonuclear leukocytes (neutrophils or PMNs) for defense against  [CLS] bacterial pathogens. Yersinia [CLS]  spp. subvert the innate immune response to cause disease in humans. In particular, the Yersinia outer protein YopJ (Y. pestis and Y. pseudotuberculosis) and YopP (Y. enterocolitica) rapidly induce", " cell death by the type III secretion system.\nThe human innate immune system relies on the coordinated activity of macrophages and polymorphonuclear leukocytes (neutrophils or PMNs) for defense against  [CLS] bacterial pathogens. Yersinia spp. subvert the innate immune response to cause disease in humans. In particular, the Yersinia [CLS]  outer protein YopJ (Y. pestis and Y. pseudotuberculosis) and YopP (Y. enterocolitica) rapidly induce apoptosis in murine macrophages and dendritic cells. However, the effects of Yersinia Yop J/P on", " enterocolitica) rapidly induce apoptosis in murine macrophages and dendritic cells. However, the effects of Yersinia Yop J/P on neutrophil fate are not clearly defined.\nIn this study, we utilized  [CLS] wild-type and mutant strains of Yersinia [CLS]  to test the contribution of YopJ and YopP on induction of apoptosis in human monocyte-derived macrophages (HMDM) and neutrophils. Whereas YopJ and YopP similarly induced apoptosis in HMDMs, interaction", " of YopJ and YopP on induction of apoptosis in human monocyte-derived macrophages (HMDM) and neutrophils. Whereas YopJ and YopP similarly induced apoptosis in HMDMs, interaction of human neutrophils with  [CLS] virulence plasmid-containing Yersinia [CLS]  did not result in PMN caspase activation, release of LDH, or loss of membrane integrity greater than PMN controls. In contrast, interaction of human PMNs with the virulence plasmid-deficient"]]
["bb_dev_74", [" cell death by the type III secretion system.\nThe human innate immune system relies on the coordinated activity of macrophages and polymorphonuclear leukocytes (neutrophils or PMNs) for defense against  [CLS] bacterial pathogens. Yersinia spp. subvert the innate immune response to cause disease in humans. In particular, the Yersinia outer protein YopJ (Y. pestis [CLS]  and Y. pseudotuberculosis) and YopP (Y. enterocolitica) rapidly induce apoptosis in murine macrophages and dendritic cells. However, the effects of Yersinia Yop J/P on neutrophil fate are not clearly"]]
["bb_dev_75", [" cell death by the type III secretion system.\nThe human innate immune system relies on the coordinated activity of macrophages and polymorphonuclear leukocytes (neutrophils or PMNs) for defense against  [CLS] bacterial pathogens. Yersinia spp. subvert the innate immune response to cause disease in humans. In particular, the Yersinia outer protein YopJ (Y. pestis and Y. pseudotuberculosis [CLS] ) and YopP (Y. enterocolitica) rapidly induce apoptosis in murine macrophages and dendritic cells. However, the effects of Yersinia Yop J/P on neutrophil fate are not clearly defined.\nIn this"]]
["bb_dev_76", [" cell death by the type III secretion system.\nThe human innate immune system relies on the coordinated activity of macrophages and polymorphonuclear leukocytes (neutrophils or PMNs) for defense against  [CLS] bacterial pathogens. Yersinia spp. subvert the innate immune response to cause disease in humans. In particular, the Yersinia outer protein YopJ (Y. pestis and Y. pseudotuberculosis) and YopP (Y. enterocolitica [CLS] ) rapidly induce apoptosis in murine macrophages and dendritic cells. However, the effects of Yersinia Yop J/P on neutrophil fate are not clearly defined.\nIn this study, we utilized wild-type"]]
["bb_dev_77", [" phagocytic interaction with Y. pestis strain KIM6, inhibition of PMN ROS production with diphenyleneiodonium chloride resulted in a reduction of PMN cell death similar to that induced by the  [CLS] virulence plasmid-containing strain Y. pestis KIM5 [CLS] .\nOur findings showed that Yersinia YopJ and/or YopP did not induce pronounced apoptosis in human neutrophils. Furthermore, robust PMN ROS production in response to virulence plasmid-deficient Yersinia was associated"]]
["bb_dev_78", [" [CLS] probiotic fermented milk beverage containing Lactobacillus casei strain Shirota [CLS]  on defecation frequency, intestinal microbiota, and the intestinal environment of healthy individuals with soft stools.\nThe effects of drinking a fermented milk beverage that contains Lactobacillus casei strain Shirota", " Lactobacillus casei strain Shirota on defecation frequency, intestinal microbiota, and the intestinal environment of healthy individuals with soft stools.\nThe effects of drinking a fermented milk beverage that contains  [CLS] Lactobacillus casei strain Shirota (LcS) at 40 billion bacterial cells/bottle for 4 weeks (probiotics, 1 bottle [CLS] /day) on defecation frequency, intestinal microbiota and the intestinal environment of healthy individuals with soft stools were evaluated. Thirty-four healthy adults who had soft stools were randomised into 2 groups,", " probiotic fermented milk beverage containing Lactobacillus casei strain Shirota on defecation frequency, intestinal microbiota, and the intestinal environment of healthy individuals with soft stools.\nThe effects of drinking a  [CLS] fermented milk beverage that contains Lactobacillus casei strain Shirota [CLS]  (LcS) at 40 billion bacterial cells/bottle for 4 weeks (probiotics, 1 bottle/day) on defecation frequency, intestinal microbiota and the intestinal environment of healthy individuals with soft stools were evaluated.", " Lactobacillus casei strain Shirota on defecation frequency, intestinal microbiota, and the intestinal environment of healthy individuals with soft stools.\nThe effects of drinking a fermented milk beverage that contains  [CLS] Lactobacillus casei strain Shirota (LcS) at 40 billion bacterial cells/bottle for 4 weeks (probiotics [CLS] , 1 bottle/day) on defecation frequency, intestinal microbiota and the intestinal environment of healthy individuals with soft stools were evaluated. Thirty-four healthy adults who had soft stools were randomised into", " Lactobacillus casei strain Shirota on defecation frequency, intestinal microbiota, and the intestinal environment of healthy individuals with soft stools.\nThe effects of drinking a fermented milk beverage that contains  [CLS] Lactobacillus casei strain Shirota (LcS) at 40 billion bacterial cells/bottle [CLS]  for 4 weeks (probiotics, 1 bottle/day) on defecation frequency, intestinal microbiota and the intestinal environment of healthy individuals with soft stools were evaluated. Thirty-four healthy adults who had soft"]]
["bb_dev_79", [" The stool quality significantly improved (hardened) compared to the placebo. Also, the water content of the stools was lower in the probiotic group than in the placebo group. Live  [CLS] LcS was recovered at 6.9 \u00b1 1.3 and 7.2 \u00b1 0.8 log(10) CFU per 1g of stool [CLS]  after 2 and 4 weeks, respectively, of probiotic treatment. The number of bifidobacteria in the stools also increased significantly compared with the level before starting the probiotics. The organic"]]
["bb_dev_80", [" LcS was recovered at 6.9 \u00b1 1.3 and 7.2 \u00b1 0.8 log(10) CFU per 1g of stool after 2 and 4 weeks, respectively, of probiotic treatment. The number of  [CLS] bifidobacteria in the stools [CLS]  also increased significantly compared with the level before starting the probiotics. The organic acid levels (total, acetic acid, propionic acid, and butyric acid) significantly increased compared with the level", " of the intake period. These results suggest that probiotic fermented milk beverage has an intestine-conditioning effect by improving the frequency of defecation and stool quality and increasing the intrinsic  [CLS] bifidobacteria in healthy individuals with soft stool [CLS] .\n\n"]]
["bb_dev_81", [" [CLS] HIV-positive men who have sex with men [CLS]  (MSM). Patients typically present with proctitis symptoms. The prevalence of rectal LGV in MSM attending sexually transmitted infection clinics in London is estimated at 1%. Health Protection Agency surveillance", " [CLS] HIV-positive men who have sex with men (MSM [CLS] ). Patients typically present with proctitis symptoms. The prevalence of rectal LGV in MSM attending sexually transmitted infection clinics in London is estimated at 1%. Health Protection Agency surveillance has", " attending sexually transmitted infection clinics in London is estimated at 1%. Health Protection Agency surveillance has shown a decrease in anorectal manifestations despite little demographic change. Two cases of  [CLS] HIV-infected patients presenting with isolated perianal ulcer disease [CLS]  are reported here. Both cases were confirmed to have rectal Chlamydia trachomatis-specific DNA of an LGV associated serovar. As presentations of LGV diversify, further education and surveillance are needed"]]
["bb_dev_82", [" a decrease in anorectal manifestations despite little demographic change. Two cases of HIV-infected patients presenting with isolated perianal ulcer disease are reported here. Both cases were confirmed to have  [CLS] rectal Chlamydia trachomatis [CLS] -specific DNA of an LGV associated serovar. As presentations of LGV diversify, further education and surveillance are needed in order to reduce transmission and prevent long-term complications. A strong argument", " attending sexually transmitted infection clinics in London is estimated at 1%. Health Protection Agency surveillance has shown a decrease in anorectal manifestations despite little demographic change. Two cases of  [CLS] HIV-infected patients presenting with isolated perianal ulcer disease are reported here. Both cases were confirmed to have rectal Chlamydia trachomatis [CLS] -specific DNA of an LGV associated serovar. As presentations of LGV diversify, further education and surveillance are needed in order to reduce transmission and prevent long-term complications. A strong argument"]]
["bb_dev_83", [" [CLS] Chlamydia muridarum respiratory [CLS]  infections in the absence of TLR2 activation.\nChlamydia trachomatis is a common sexually transmitted pathogen and is associated with infant pneumonia. Data from the female mouse model of genital"]]
["bb_dev_84", [" [CLS] virulence of Chlamydia muridarum [CLS]  respiratory infections in the absence of TLR2 activation.\nChlamydia trachomatis is a common sexually transmitted pathogen and is associated with infant pneumonia. Data from the female mouse model of"]]
["bb_dev_85", [" [CLS] Chlamydia trachomatis is a common sexually transmitted pathogen [CLS]  and is associated with infant pneumonia. Data from the female mouse model of genital tract chlamydia infection suggests a requirement for TLR2-dependent signaling in the induction of inflammation and"]]
["bb_dev_86", [" respiratory infections in the absence of TLR2 activation.\nChlamydia trachomatis is a common sexually transmitted pathogen and is associated with infant pneumonia. Data from the female mouse model of  [CLS] genital tract chlamydia [CLS]  infection suggests a requirement for TLR2-dependent signaling in the induction of inflammation and oviduct pathology. We hypothesized that the role of TLR2 in moderating mucosal inflammation is site specific.", " virulence of Chlamydia muridarum respiratory infections in the absence of TLR2 activation.\nChlamydia trachomatis is a common sexually transmitted pathogen and is associated with infant pneumonia. Data from the  [CLS] female mouse model of genital tract chlamydia infection [CLS]  suggests a requirement for TLR2-dependent signaling in the induction of inflammation and oviduct pathology. We hypothesized that the role of TLR2 in moderating mucosal inflammation is site specific. In"]]
["bb_dev_87", [" in the induction of inflammation and oviduct pathology. We hypothesized that the role of TLR2 in moderating mucosal inflammation is site specific. In order to investigate this, we infected  [CLS] mice via the intranasal route with C. muridarum [CLS]  and observed that in the absence of TLR2 activation, mice had more severe disease, higher lung cytokine levels, and an exaggerated influx of neutrophils and T-cells into the lungs.", " oviduct pathology. We hypothesized that the role of TLR2 in moderating mucosal inflammation is site specific. In order to investigate this, we infected mice via the intranasal route with  [CLS] C. muridarum and observed that in the absence of TLR2 activation, mice had more severe disease, higher lung cytokine levels, and an exaggerated influx of neutrophils and T-cells into the lungs. This could not be explained by impaired bacterial clearance as TLR2-deficient mice [CLS]  cleared the infection similar to controls. These data suggest that TLR2 has an anti-inflammatory function in the lung during Chlamydia infection, and that the role of TLR2 in mucosal", " oviduct pathology. We hypothesized that the role of TLR2 in moderating mucosal inflammation is site specific. In order to investigate this, we infected mice via the intranasal route with  [CLS] C. muridarum and observed that in the absence of TLR2 activation, mice [CLS]  had more severe disease, higher lung cytokine levels, and an exaggerated influx of neutrophils and T-cells into the lungs. This could not be explained by impaired bacterial clearance as"]]
["bb_dev_88", [" [CLS] Marinobacter belong to the class of Gammaproteobacteria and these motile, halophilic or halotolerent bacteria are widely distributed throughout the world's oceans [CLS]  having been isolated from a wide variety of marine environments. They have also been identified as members of the bacterial flora associated with other marine organisms. Here, using a", " [CLS] Marinobacter belong to the class of Gammaproteobacteria and these motile, halophilic or halotolerent bacteria are widely distributed throughout the world's oceans having been isolated from a wide variety of marine environments. They have also been identified as members of the bacterial flora associated with other marine organisms [CLS] . Here, using a combination of natural products chemistry and genomic analysis, we assess the nature of the siderophores produced by this genus and their potential relationship to phylogeny and", " [CLS] Marinobacter belong to the class of Gammaproteobacteria and these motile, halophilic or halotolerent bacteria are widely distributed throughout the world's oceans having been isolated from a wide variety of marine environments. They have also been identified as members of the bacterial flora [CLS]  associated with other marine organisms. Here, using a combination of natural products chemistry and genomic analysis, we assess the nature of the siderophores produced by this genus and their", " [CLS] Marinobacter belong to the class of Gammaproteobacteria and these motile, halophilic or halotolerent bacteria are widely distributed throughout the world's oceans having been isolated from a wide variety of marine environments [CLS] . They have also been identified as members of the bacterial flora associated with other marine organisms. Here, using a combination of natural products chemistry and genomic analysis, we assess"]]
["bb_dev_89", [" [CLS] Marinobacter belong to the class of Gammaproteobacteria and these motile, halophilic or halotolerent [CLS]  bacteria are widely distributed throughout the world's oceans having been isolated from a wide variety of marine environments. They have also been identified as members of the bacterial flora", " [CLS] Marinobacter belong to the class of Gammaproteobacteria and these motile [CLS] , halophilic or halotolerent bacteria are widely distributed throughout the world's oceans having been isolated from a wide variety of marine environments. They have also been identified as members of", " [CLS] Marinobacter belong to the class of Gammaproteobacteria and these motile, halophilic [CLS]  or halotolerent bacteria are widely distributed throughout the world's oceans having been isolated from a wide variety of marine environments. They have also been identified as members of the"]]
["bb_dev_90", [" [CLS] obligate intracellular bacterial pathogen Coxiella burnetii [CLS] .\nOur previous study demonstrated that treatment of Coxiella burnetii with the phase I lipopolysaccharide (PI-LPS)-targeted monoclonal antibody (MAb) 1E4 significantly inhibited C. burnetii infection in mice, suggesting that 1E4", " [CLS] pathogen Coxiella burnetii [CLS] .\nOur previous study demonstrated that treatment of Coxiella burnetii with the phase I lipopolysaccharide (PI-LPS)-targeted monoclonal antibody (MAb) 1E4 significantly inhibited C. burnetii infection in mice, suggesting that 1E4"]]
["bb_dev_91", [" against the obligate intracellular bacterial pathogen Coxiella burnetii.\nOur previous study demonstrated that treatment of Coxiella burnetii with the phase I lipopolysaccharide (PI-LPS)-targeted monoclonal antibody (MAb) 1E4 significantly inhibited  [CLS] C. burnetii infection in mice [CLS] , suggesting that 1E4 is a protective MAb. To determine whether passive transfer of antibodies (Abs) can provide protection against C. burnetii natural infection, we examined if passive transfer of", " MAb. To determine whether passive transfer of antibodies (Abs) can provide protection against C. burnetii natural infection, we examined if passive transfer of 1E4 would protect SCID mice against  [CLS] C. burnetii aerosol [CLS]  infection. The results indicated that 1E4 conferred significant protection against aerosolized C. burnetii, suggesting that 1E4 may be useful for preventing C. burnetii natural infection. To further understand the", " C. burnetii natural infection, we examined if passive transfer of 1E4 would protect SCID mice against C. burnetii aerosol infection. The results indicated that 1E4 conferred significant protection against  [CLS] aerosolized C. burnetii [CLS] , suggesting that 1E4 may be useful for preventing C. burnetii natural infection. To further understand the mechanisms of 1E4-mediated protection and to test the possibility of using humanized 1E4", " and a humanized single-chain variable fragment (huscFv1E4) retained the ability of 1E4 to inhibit C. burnetii infection. The results indicated that Fab1E4, muscFv1E4, and huscFv1E4 were able to inhibit  [CLS] C. burnetii infection in mice [CLS]  but that their ability to inhibit C. burnetii infection was lower than that of 1E4. In addition, treatment of C. burnetii with Fab1E4, muscFv1E4, or huscFv1E4 can block C.", " mice but that their ability to inhibit C. burnetii infection was lower than that of 1E4. In addition, treatment of C. burnetii with Fab1E4, muscFv1E4, or huscFv1E4 can block  [CLS] C. burnetii infection of macrophages [CLS] . Interestingly, treatment of C. burnetii with huscFv1E4 can significantly reduce C. burnetii infectivity in human macrophages. This report provides the first evidence to demonstrate that the humanized variable fragments", " 1E4. In addition, treatment of C. burnetii with Fab1E4, muscFv1E4, or huscFv1E4 can block C. burnetii infection of macrophages. Interestingly, treatment of C. burnetii with huscFv1E4 can significantly reduce  [CLS] C. burnetii infectivity in human [CLS]  macrophages. This report provides the first evidence to demonstrate that the humanized variable fragments of an LPS-specific MAb can neutralize C. burnetii infection and appears to be a promising", " 1E4. In addition, treatment of C. burnetii with Fab1E4, muscFv1E4, or huscFv1E4 can block C. burnetii infection of macrophages. Interestingly, treatment of C. burnetii with huscFv1E4 can significantly reduce  [CLS] C. burnetii infectivity in human macrophages [CLS] . This report provides the first evidence to demonstrate that the humanized variable fragments of an LPS-specific MAb can neutralize C. burnetii infection and appears to be a promising step"]]
["bb_dev_92", [" of mutation patterns in GyrA and ParC genes with quinolone resistance levels in lactic acid bacteria.\nThe quinolone resistance of 19 lactic acid bacterial strains belonging to the genera  [CLS] Enterococcus and Lactobacillus isolated from the natural fermented koumiss and yoghurt [CLS]  were investigated. The objective of this study was to determine the quinolone resistance levels and to explore the association of the resistance with the mutation patterns in gyrA and", " of mutation patterns in GyrA and ParC genes with quinolone resistance levels in lactic acid bacteria.\nThe quinolone resistance of 19 lactic acid bacterial strains belonging to the genera  [CLS] Enterococcus and Lactobacillus isolated from the natural fermented koumiss [CLS]  and yoghurt were investigated. The objective of this study was to determine the quinolone resistance levels and to explore the association of the resistance with the mutation patterns in", " [CLS] Enterococcus and Brevibacterium\n species were detected on the surface of cheeses [CLS] . The cluster analysis \nshowed that Gorgonzola, Taleggio and Formaggio di Fossa cheeses present \nhigh similarity in their surface bacterial composition while major \ndifferences in the DGGE", " [CLS] Enterococcus and Brevibacterium\n species were detected on the surface of cheeses [CLS] . The cluster analysis \nshowed that Gorgonzola, Taleggio and Formaggio di Fossa cheeses present \nhigh similarity in their surface bacterial composition while major \ndifferences in the DGGE"]]
["bb_dev_93", [" of mutation patterns in GyrA and ParC genes with quinolone resistance levels in lactic acid bacteria.\nThe quinolone resistance of 19 lactic acid bacterial strains belonging to the genera  [CLS] Enterococcus and Lactobacillus isolated from the natural fermented koumiss and yoghurt were investigated. The objective of this study was to determine the quinolone resistance levels and to explore the association of the resistance with the mutation patterns in gyrA and parC genes, as is currently recommended by the Food and Agriculture Organization/World Health Organization Joint Expert Committee in Guidelines for Evaluation of Probiotics in Food for probiotic lactic acid bacteria drug resistance in 2001. The Oxford Cup method and double-tube dilution method were used to determine the quinolone resistance levels of the isolated strains. Generally, all of the 19 strains showed resistance towards norfloxacin and ciprofloxacin [CLS]  when the Oxford cup method was used, whereas the incidence was lower (to norfloxacin 89.5% and to ciprofloxacin 68.4%) when minimum inhibitory concentration breakpoints (CLSI M100-S23) were tested. Furthermore,", " \nhigh similarity in their surface bacterial composition while major \ndifferences in the DGGE profiles were observed in Scimudin and Casera. \nThe molecular taxonomical identification among the  [CLS] Gram positive \nisolates, reveals the presence of the following bacterial genera: Staphylococcus, Micrococcus, Macrococcus, Enterococcus [CLS] , Lactobacillus, Carnobacterium, Leuconostoc, Brevibacterium, Corynebacterium, Brochothrix, Bacillus.\n"]]
["bb_dev_94", [" patterns in GyrA and ParC genes with quinolone resistance levels in lactic acid bacteria.\nThe quinolone resistance of 19 lactic acid bacterial strains belonging to the genera Enterococcus and  [CLS] Lactobacillus isolated from the natural fermented koumiss and yoghurt [CLS]  were investigated. The objective of this study was to determine the quinolone resistance levels and to explore the association of the resistance with the mutation patterns in gyrA and", " patterns in GyrA and ParC genes with quinolone resistance levels in lactic acid bacteria.\nThe quinolone resistance of 19 lactic acid bacterial strains belonging to the genera Enterococcus and  [CLS] Lactobacillus isolated from the natural fermented koumiss [CLS]  and yoghurt were investigated. The objective of this study was to determine the quinolone resistance levels and to explore the association of the resistance with the mutation patterns in", " [CLS] Lactobacillus was seen to be present in different numbers depending of the cheese [CLS]  surface.  Dolci et al. (2009) detected Lactobacillus counts of 105\u2013107 CFU/cm2 on Fontina cheese surface after 90 days of ripening and Cocolin et al. (2009)\n reported that", " [CLS] Lactobacillus was seen to be present in different numbers depending of the cheese surface [CLS] .  Dolci et al. (2009) detected Lactobacillus counts of 105\u2013107 CFU/cm2 on Fontina cheese surface after 90 days of ripening and Cocolin et al. (2009)\n reported that lactococci", " [CLS] Lactobacillus counts of 105\u2013107 CFU/cm2 on Fontina cheese surface [CLS]  after 90 days of ripening and Cocolin et al. (2009)\n reported that lactococci and lactobacilli, dominated the microbial \necology of Gorgonzola rind. Our results showed that the", " [CLS] Lactobacillus counts of 105\u2013107 CFU/cm2 on Fontina cheese [CLS]  surface after 90 days of ripening and Cocolin et al. (2009)\n reported that lactococci and lactobacilli, dominated the microbial \necology of Gorgonzola rind. Our results showed that"]]
["bb_dev_95", [" patterns in GyrA and ParC genes with quinolone resistance levels in lactic acid bacteria.\nThe quinolone resistance of 19 lactic acid bacterial strains belonging to the genera Enterococcus and  [CLS] Lactobacillus isolated from the natural fermented koumiss and yoghurt were investigated. The objective of this study was to determine the quinolone resistance levels and to explore the association of the resistance with the mutation patterns in gyrA and parC genes, as is currently recommended by the Food and Agriculture Organization/World Health Organization Joint Expert Committee in Guidelines for Evaluation of Probiotics in Food for probiotic lactic acid bacteria drug resistance in 2001. The Oxford Cup method and double-tube dilution method were used to determine the quinolone resistance levels of the isolated strains. Generally, all of the 19 strains showed resistance towards norfloxacin and ciprofloxacin [CLS]  when the Oxford cup method was used, whereas the incidence was lower (to norfloxacin 89.5% and to ciprofloxacin 68.4%) when minimum inhibitory concentration breakpoints (CLSI M100-S23) were tested. Furthermore,", " [CLS] Lactobacillus, Streptococcus and Leuconostoc, specific hydroxy acid dehydrogenase activity [CLS]  was found to be 5- to 10-fold higher than the transaminase activity.The decarboxylation of \u03b1-ketoisocaproic acid leads to the formation of 3-methylbutanal (Fig. 1). This decarboxylase activity was found", " [CLS] Lactobacillus, Streptococcus and Leuconostoc, specific hydroxy acid dehydrogenase activity was found to be 5- to 10-fold higher than the transaminase activity [CLS] .The decarboxylation of \u03b1-ketoisocaproic acid leads to the formation of 3-methylbutanal (Fig. 1). This decarboxylase activity was found in only two of the strains tested (B1157 and B1506) (Fig. 3C).", " [CLS] anaerobic strains belonging to the genera Lactococcus, Lactobacillus [CLS] , Streptococcus and Leuconostoc, specific hydroxy acid dehydrogenase activity was found to be 5- to 10-fold higher than the transaminase activity.The decarboxylation of \u03b1-ketoisocaproic acid leads to the formation of", " \nhigh similarity in their surface bacterial composition while major \ndifferences in the DGGE profiles were observed in Scimudin and Casera. \nThe molecular taxonomical identification among the  [CLS] Gram positive \nisolates, reveals the presence of the following bacterial genera: Staphylococcus, Micrococcus, Macrococcus, Enterococcus, Lactobacillus [CLS] , Carnobacterium, Leuconostoc, Brevibacterium, Corynebacterium, Brochothrix, Bacillus.\n"]]
["bb_dev_96", [" genetic basis for quinolone resistance may be closely related to mutations in gyrA genes as there were 10 mutation sites in amino-acid sequences encoded by gyrA genes in 10  [CLS] quinolone resistance strains and 14 mutation sites in Enterococcus durans HZ28 [CLS] , whereas no typical mutations were detected in parC genes. \n\n"]]
["bb_dev_97", [" [CLS] M-13 am5 infected Escherichia coli [CLS]  cells which are highly concentrated on cellophane membrane disks replicate efficiently endogenous M-13 duplex DNA. If the reaction is carried out in the presence of bromodeoxyuridine triphosphate, the majority"]]
["bb_dev_98", [" [CLS] M-13 am5 [CLS]  infected Escherichia coli cells which are highly concentrated on cellophane membrane disks replicate efficiently endogenous M-13 duplex DNA. If the reaction is carried out in the presence of bromodeoxyuridine"]]
["bb_dev_99", [" [CLS] Mycobacterium leprae antigen in the urine of leprosy patients [CLS] .\nTwo methods for detecting the phenolic glycolipid, PGL-1, a Mycobacterium leprae-specific molecule, in the urine of leprosy patients are described. Both methods rely on the 100-fold preconcentration of the", " [CLS] Mycobacterium leprae antigen in the urine of leprosy patients [CLS] .\nTwo methods for detecting the phenolic glycolipid, PGL-1, a Mycobacterium leprae-specific molecule, in the urine of leprosy patients are described. Both methods rely on the 100-fold preconcentration of the", " [CLS] Mycobacterium leprae-specific molecule, in the urine of leprosy patients [CLS]  are described. Both methods rely on the 100-fold preconcentration of the urine, which can be accomplished by a single-step ultrafiltration procedure. The equivalent of approximately 2.5 micrograms of PGL-1/ml", " [CLS] Mycobacterium leprae-specific molecule, in the urine of leprosy patients [CLS]  are described. Both methods rely on the 100-fold preconcentration of the urine, which can be accomplished by a single-step ultrafiltration procedure. The equivalent of approximately 2.5 micrograms of PGL-1/ml"]]
["bb_dev_100", [" [CLS] mycobacteria causing non-pulmonary disease in Queensland [CLS] .\nDuring the period 1971--7, the Tuberculosis Reference Laboratory in Queensland dealt with 52 isolates of atypical mycobacteria made from non-pulmonary sites under circumstances suggesting complicity in disease. Twenty-four isolates", " [CLS] Queensland dealt with 52 isolates of atypical mycobacteria [CLS]  made from non-pulmonary sites under circumstances suggesting complicity in disease. Twenty-four isolates belonging to the MAIS complex were associated with lymph node infections in children. Twelve isolates belonged to"]]
["bb_dev_101", [" [CLS] mycobacteria causing non-pulmonary disease [CLS]  in Queensland.\nDuring the period 1971--7, the Tuberculosis Reference Laboratory in Queensland dealt with 52 isolates of atypical mycobacteria made from non-pulmonary sites under circumstances suggesting complicity in disease.", " [CLS] mycobacteria made from non-pulmonary sites under circumstances suggesting complicity in disease [CLS] . Twenty-four isolates belonging to the MAIS complex were associated with lymph node infections in children. Twelve isolates belonged to the M. fortuitum-chelonei complex; most were from superficial abscesses. Five"]]
["bb_dev_102", [" from non-pulmonary sites under circumstances suggesting complicity in disease. Twenty-four isolates belonging to the MAIS complex were associated with lymph node infections in children. Twelve isolates belonged to the  [CLS] M. fortuitum-chelonei complex; most were from superficial abscesses [CLS] . Five cases of M. marinum infection and 8 of M. ulcerans disease were detected.\n\n"]]
["bb_dev_103", [" [CLS] Ampicillin-resistant Haemophilus influenzae type B [CLS]  possessing a TEM-type beta-lactamase but little permeability barrier to ampicillin.\nAmpicillin-resistant Haemophilus influenzae type B have been reported only during the past year. Five clinical isolates from the U.S.", " [CLS] Ampicillin-resistant Haemophilus influenzae type B [CLS]  have been reported only during the past year. Five clinical isolates from the U.S. and Germany all had the TEM-type beta-lactamase which is known to be transferred widely among", " [CLS] Haemophilus influenzae type B have been reported only during the past year. Five clinical isolates from the U.S. and Germany all had the TEM-type beta-lactamase which is known to be transferred widely among other gram-negative [CLS]  bacilli. Unlike those bacilli, however, the H. influenzae cell had very little barrier to entry of penicillins. This greater permeability of the H. influenzae cell to penicillins appeared to"]]
["bb_dev_104", [" [CLS] Haemophilus influenzae type B have been reported only during the past year. Five clinical isolates from the U.S. and Germany [CLS]  all had the TEM-type beta-lactamase which is known to be transferred widely among other gram-negative bacilli. Unlike those bacilli, however, the H. influenzae cell had very little barrier to", " [CLS] Haemophilus influenzae type B have been reported only during the past year. Five clinical isolates from the U.S. [CLS]  and Germany all had the TEM-type beta-lactamase which is known to be transferred widely among other gram-negative bacilli. Unlike those bacilli, however, the H. influenzae cell had very little"]]
["bb_dev_105", [" [CLS] Haemophilus influenzae type B have been reported only during the past year. Five clinical [CLS]  isolates from the U.S. and Germany all had the TEM-type beta-lactamase which is known to be transferred widely among other gram-negative bacilli. Unlike those bacilli, however, the H. influenzae"]]
["bb_dev_106", [" been reported only during the past year. Five clinical isolates from the U.S. and Germany all had the TEM-type beta-lactamase which is known to be transferred widely among other  [CLS] gram-negative bacilli [CLS] . Unlike those bacilli, however, the H. influenzae cell had very little barrier to entry of penicillins. This greater permeability of the H. influenzae cell to penicillins appeared to reduce"]]
["bb_dev_107", [" penicillins appeared to reduce the protective effect of its beta-lactamase, in that acquisition of the TEM-type beta-lactamase increased levels of resistance to penicillins much less for individual cells of  [CLS] H. influenzae than for those of Escherichia coli. Large inocula of either species appeared highly resistant [CLS] . The unusually low level of resistance of individual cells of H. influenzae containing the TEM-type beta-lactamase may have delayed their emergence or recognition, and has unresolved clinical implications.\n", " This greater permeability of the H. influenzae cell to penicillins appeared to reduce the protective effect of its beta-lactamase, in that acquisition of the TEM-type beta-lactamase increased levels of  [CLS] resistance to penicillins much less for individual cells of H. influenzae [CLS]  than for those of Escherichia coli. Large inocula of either species appeared highly resistant. The unusually low level of resistance of individual cells of H. influenzae containing the TEM-type", " to penicillins much less for individual cells of H. influenzae than for those of Escherichia coli. Large inocula of either species appeared highly resistant. The unusually low level of  [CLS] resistance of individual cells of H. influenzae [CLS]  containing the TEM-type beta-lactamase may have delayed their emergence or recognition, and has unresolved clinical implications.\n\n"]]
["bb_dev_108", [" [CLS] Vibrio fetus human [CLS]  infection--isolation from a subacute bacterial endocarditis case.\n\n"]]
["bb_dev_109", [" [CLS] drug-resistant strain of Salmonella typhimurium (993) [CLS]  has been used to construct a plasmid vector for cloning in a wild strain of Salmonella. The strain (993) contains at least two plasmids. The smaller plasmid (9 kb)"]]
["bb_dev_110", [" plasmid of Salmonella typhimurium.\nA naturally occurring plasmid isolated from a drug-resistant strain of Salmonella typhimurium (993) has been used to construct a plasmid vector for cloning in a  [CLS] wild strain of Salmonella [CLS] . The strain (993) contains at least two plasmids. The smaller plasmid (9 kb) contains an ampicillin-resistant marker, while the larger one (25 kb) is cryptic. Physical mapping of the"]]
["bb_dev_111", [" [CLS] nonvirulent Ara+ Burkholderia pseudomallei [CLS]  isolates is immunologically indistinguishable from lipopolysaccharide from virulent Ara- clinical isolates.\nDifferent lines of evidence suggest that a discrepancy between the distribution of Burkholderia (Pseudomonas) pseudomallei in the environment"]]
["bb_dev_112", [" [CLS] Ara- clinical [CLS]  isolates.\nDifferent lines of evidence suggest that a discrepancy between the distribution of Burkholderia (Pseudomonas) pseudomallei in the environment and the distribution of the disease melioidosis is attributable, at", " of the LPSs from the two biotypes showed identical ladder patterns that were typical for smooth LPSs from other gram-negative bacteria. The 210 isolates with typical LPS patterns (119  [CLS] Ara- clinical, 13 Ara- soil, 70 Ara+ soil, and 8 reference National Type Culture Collection strains) also exhibited similar immunoblot profiles against pooled sera from patients with melioidosis [CLS]  and hyperimmune mouse sera. Concordant findings were noted in the indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay with Ara- and Ara+ LPSs to coat the microtiter plates. The LPSs of the different", " of the LPSs from the two biotypes showed identical ladder patterns that were typical for smooth LPSs from other gram-negative bacteria. The 210 isolates with typical LPS patterns (119  [CLS] Ara- clinical, 13 Ara- soil, 70 Ara+ soil, and 8 reference National Type Culture Collection strains) also exhibited similar immunoblot profiles against pooled sera from patients with melioidosis and hyperimmune mouse [CLS]  sera. Concordant findings were noted in the indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay with Ara- and Ara+ LPSs to coat the microtiter plates. The LPSs of the different B. pseudomallei biotypes", " of the LPSs from the two biotypes showed identical ladder patterns that were typical for smooth LPSs from other gram-negative bacteria. The 210 isolates with typical LPS patterns (119  [CLS] Ara- clinical [CLS] , 13 Ara- soil, 70 Ara+ soil, and 8 reference National Type Culture Collection strains) also exhibited similar immunoblot profiles against pooled sera from patients with melioidosis and hyperimmune mouse", " of the LPSs from the two biotypes showed identical ladder patterns that were typical for smooth LPSs from other gram-negative bacteria. The 210 isolates with typical LPS patterns (119  [CLS] Ara- clinical, 13 Ara- soil, 70 Ara+ soil, and 8 reference National Type Culture Collection strains) also exhibited similar immunoblot profiles against pooled sera from patients with melioidosis and hyperimmune mouse sera [CLS] . Concordant findings were noted in the indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay with Ara- and Ara+ LPSs to coat the microtiter plates. The LPSs of the different B. pseudomallei biotypes appear", " of the LPSs from the two biotypes showed identical ladder patterns that were typical for smooth LPSs from other gram-negative bacteria. The 210 isolates with typical LPS patterns (119  [CLS] Ara- clinical, 13 Ara- soil, 70 Ara+ soil, and 8 reference National Type Culture Collection strains) also exhibited similar immunoblot profiles against pooled sera from patients with melioidosis [CLS]  and hyperimmune mouse sera. Concordant findings were noted in the indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay with Ara- and Ara+ LPSs to coat the microtiter plates. The LPSs of the different", " from the two biotypes showed identical ladder patterns that were typical for smooth LPSs from other gram-negative bacteria. The 210 isolates with typical LPS patterns (119 Ara- clinical, 13  [CLS] Ara- soil, 70 Ara+ soil, and 8 reference National Type Culture Collection strains) also exhibited similar immunoblot profiles against pooled sera from patients with melioidosis and hyperimmune mouse sera [CLS] . Concordant findings were noted in the indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay with Ara- and Ara+ LPSs to coat the microtiter plates. The LPSs of the different B. pseudomallei biotypes appear", " from the two biotypes showed identical ladder patterns that were typical for smooth LPSs from other gram-negative bacteria. The 210 isolates with typical LPS patterns (119 Ara- clinical, 13  [CLS] Ara- soil, 70 Ara+ soil, and 8 reference National Type Culture Collection strains) also exhibited similar immunoblot profiles against pooled sera from patients with melioidosis and hyperimmune mouse [CLS]  sera. Concordant findings were noted in the indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay with Ara- and Ara+ LPSs to coat the microtiter plates. The LPSs of the different B. pseudomallei biotypes", " from the two biotypes showed identical ladder patterns that were typical for smooth LPSs from other gram-negative bacteria. The 210 isolates with typical LPS patterns (119 Ara- clinical, 13  [CLS] Ara- soil, 70 Ara+ soil, and 8 reference National Type Culture Collection strains) also exhibited similar immunoblot profiles against pooled sera from patients with melioidosis [CLS]  and hyperimmune mouse sera. Concordant findings were noted in the indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay with Ara- and Ara+ LPSs to coat the microtiter plates. The LPSs of the different", " from the two biotypes showed identical ladder patterns that were typical for smooth LPSs from other gram-negative bacteria. The 210 isolates with typical LPS patterns (119 Ara- clinical, 13  [CLS] Ara- soil, 70 Ara+ soil, and 8 reference National Type Culture Collection strains) also exhibited similar immunoblot profiles against pooled sera from patients with melioidosis [CLS]  and hyperimmune mouse sera. Concordant findings were noted in the indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay with Ara- and Ara+ LPSs to coat the microtiter plates. The LPSs of the different", " from the two biotypes showed identical ladder patterns that were typical for smooth LPSs from other gram-negative bacteria. The 210 isolates with typical LPS patterns (119 Ara- clinical, 13  [CLS] Ara- soil [CLS] , 70 Ara+ soil, and 8 reference National Type Culture Collection strains) also exhibited similar immunoblot profiles against pooled sera from patients with melioidosis and hyperimmune mouse sera. Concordant findings", " Collection strains) also exhibited similar immunoblot profiles against pooled sera from patients with melioidosis and hyperimmune mouse sera. Concordant findings were noted in the indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay with  [CLS] Ara- and Ara+ LPSs to coat the microtiter plates [CLS] . The LPSs of the different B. pseudomallei biotypes appear antigenically indistinguishable. It is, therefore, unlikely that this component is related to the virulence and pathogenicity of B. pseudomallei.\n"]]
["bb_dev_113", [" [CLS] virulent Ara- [CLS]  clinical isolates.\nDifferent lines of evidence suggest that a discrepancy between the distribution of Burkholderia (Pseudomonas) pseudomallei in the environment and the distribution of the disease melioidosis is attributable,"]]
["bb_dev_114", [" distinct biotypes have been described, only one of which is virulent. In this study, lipopolysaccharides (LPSs) were extracted by the proteinase K digestion method from a total of 214  [CLS] B. pseudomallei isolates, and their immunoreactivities with sera from patients with different clinical spectra and with other infections [CLS]  were evaluated. With the exception of4 isolates from a total of 214 tested, the sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis silver-staining profiles of the LPSs from the two biotypes showed", " distinct biotypes have been described, only one of which is virulent. In this study, lipopolysaccharides (LPSs) were extracted by the proteinase K digestion method from a total of 214  [CLS] B. pseudomallei isolates, and their immunoreactivities with sera from patients with different clinical spectra and with other infections [CLS]  were evaluated. With the exception of4 isolates from a total of 214 tested, the sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis silver-staining profiles of the LPSs from the two biotypes showed"]]
["bb_dev_115", [" biotypes showed identical ladder patterns that were typical for smooth LPSs from other gram-negative bacteria. The 210 isolates with typical LPS patterns (119 Ara- clinical, 13 Ara- soil, 70  [CLS] Ara+ soil, and 8 reference National Type Culture Collection strains) also exhibited similar immunoblot profiles against pooled sera from patients with melioidosis and hyperimmune mouse sera [CLS] . Concordant findings were noted in the indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay with Ara- and Ara+ LPSs to coat the microtiter plates. The LPSs of the different B. pseudomallei biotypes appear", " biotypes showed identical ladder patterns that were typical for smooth LPSs from other gram-negative bacteria. The 210 isolates with typical LPS patterns (119 Ara- clinical, 13 Ara- soil, 70  [CLS] Ara+ soil, and 8 reference National Type Culture Collection strains) also exhibited similar immunoblot profiles against pooled sera from patients with melioidosis [CLS]  and hyperimmune mouse sera. Concordant findings were noted in the indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay with Ara- and Ara+ LPSs to coat the microtiter plates. The LPSs of the different", " biotypes showed identical ladder patterns that were typical for smooth LPSs from other gram-negative bacteria. The 210 isolates with typical LPS patterns (119 Ara- clinical, 13 Ara- soil, 70  [CLS] Ara+ soil [CLS] , and 8 reference National Type Culture Collection strains) also exhibited similar immunoblot profiles against pooled sera from patients with melioidosis and hyperimmune mouse sera. Concordant findings were noted in", " biotypes showed identical ladder patterns that were typical for smooth LPSs from other gram-negative bacteria. The 210 isolates with typical LPS patterns (119 Ara- clinical, 13 Ara- soil, 70  [CLS] Ara+ soil, and 8 reference National Type Culture Collection strains) also exhibited similar immunoblot profiles against pooled sera from patients with melioidosis [CLS]  and hyperimmune mouse sera. Concordant findings were noted in the indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay with Ara- and Ara+ LPSs to coat the microtiter plates. The LPSs of the different", " biotypes showed identical ladder patterns that were typical for smooth LPSs from other gram-negative bacteria. The 210 isolates with typical LPS patterns (119 Ara- clinical, 13 Ara- soil, 70  [CLS] Ara+ soil, and 8 reference National Type Culture Collection strains) also exhibited similar immunoblot profiles against pooled sera from patients with melioidosis and hyperimmune mouse [CLS]  sera. Concordant findings were noted in the indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay with Ara- and Ara+ LPSs to coat the microtiter plates. The LPSs of the different B. pseudomallei biotypes", " also exhibited similar immunoblot profiles against pooled sera from patients with melioidosis and hyperimmune mouse sera. Concordant findings were noted in the indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay with Ara- and  [CLS] Ara+ LPSs to coat the microtiter plates [CLS] . The LPSs of the different B. pseudomallei biotypes appear antigenically indistinguishable. It is, therefore, unlikely that this component is related to the virulence and pathogenicity of B. pseudomallei.\n"]]
["bb_dev_116", [" to coat the microtiter plates. The LPSs of the different B. pseudomallei biotypes appear antigenically indistinguishable. It is, therefore, unlikely that this component is related to the virulence and  [CLS] pathogenicity of B. pseudomallei [CLS] .\n\n", " Ara+ LPSs to coat the microtiter plates. The LPSs of the different B. pseudomallei biotypes appear antigenically indistinguishable. It is, therefore, unlikely that this component is related to the  [CLS] virulence and pathogenicity of B. pseudomallei [CLS] .\n\n"]]
["bb_dev_117", [" 10(4)-10(6), 10(3)-10(6) and 10(2)-10(4) cfu/g, respectively. CO2-atmosphere +/- nisin inhibited the growth of Gram-negative bacteria, whereas nisin had no effect on these in vacuum packages. The Gram-negative flora on  [CLS] vacuum-packed salmon was dominated by a Vibrio sp. [CLS] , resembling V. marinus, Enterobacteriaceae (Enterobacter agglomerans, Serratia liquefaciens and Rahnella aquatilis) and occasionally Aeromonas hydrophila. Irrespective of the addition of nisin and/or CO2-atmosphere, the LAB microflora was dominated by"]]
["bb_dev_118", [" 10(4)-10(6), 10(3)-10(6) and 10(2)-10(4) cfu/g, respectively. CO2-atmosphere +/- nisin inhibited the growth of Gram-negative bacteria, whereas nisin had no effect on these in vacuum packages. The Gram-negative flora on  [CLS] vacuum-packed salmon was dominated by a Vibrio sp., resembling V. marinus, Enterobacteriaceae [CLS]  (Enterobacter agglomerans, Serratia liquefaciens and Rahnella aquatilis) and occasionally Aeromonas hydrophila. Irrespective of the addition of nisin and/or CO2-atmosphere, the LAB microflora was dominated by Carnobacterium piscicola, which was", " [CLS] Enterobacteriaceae family may be very common on the cheese [CLS]  surface ( Chaves-Lopez et al., 2006, Deetae et al., 2009, Larpin, 2006, Morales et al., 2003, Mounier et al., 2005 and Rea et al., 2007).\n", " [CLS] Enterobacteriaceae family may be very common on the cheese surface [CLS]  ( Chaves-Lopez et al., 2006, Deetae et al., 2009, Larpin, 2006, Morales et al., 2003, Mounier et al., 2005 and Rea et al., 2007).\n"]]
["bb_dev_119", [" 10(4)-10(6), 10(3)-10(6) and 10(2)-10(4) cfu/g, respectively. CO2-atmosphere +/- nisin inhibited the growth of Gram-negative bacteria, whereas nisin had no effect on these in vacuum packages. The Gram-negative flora on  [CLS] vacuum-packed salmon was dominated by a Vibrio sp., resembling V. marinus, Enterobacteriaceae (Enterobacter agglomerans [CLS] , Serratia liquefaciens and Rahnella aquatilis) and occasionally Aeromonas hydrophila. Irrespective of the addition of nisin and/or CO2-atmosphere, the LAB microflora was dominated by Carnobacterium piscicola, which was found to"]]
["bb_dev_120", [" 10(4)-10(6), 10(3)-10(6) and 10(2)-10(4) cfu/g, respectively. CO2-atmosphere +/- nisin inhibited the growth of Gram-negative bacteria, whereas nisin had no effect on these in vacuum packages. The Gram-negative flora on  [CLS] vacuum-packed salmon was dominated by a Vibrio sp., resembling V. marinus, Enterobacteriaceae (Enterobacter agglomerans, Serratia liquefaciens [CLS]  and Rahnella aquatilis) and occasionally Aeromonas hydrophila. Irrespective of the addition of nisin and/or CO2-atmosphere, the LAB microflora was dominated by Carnobacterium piscicola, which was found to account for"]]
["bb_dev_121", [" 10(4)-10(6), 10(3)-10(6) and 10(2)-10(4) cfu/g, respectively. CO2-atmosphere +/- nisin inhibited the growth of Gram-negative bacteria, whereas nisin had no effect on these in vacuum packages. The Gram-negative flora on  [CLS] vacuum-packed salmon was dominated by a Vibrio sp., resembling V. marinus, Enterobacteriaceae (Enterobacter agglomerans, Serratia liquefaciens and Rahnella aquatilis [CLS] ) and occasionally Aeromonas hydrophila. Irrespective of the addition of nisin and/or CO2-atmosphere, the LAB microflora was dominated by Carnobacterium piscicola, which was found to account for 87% of the"]]
["bb_dev_122", [" 10(4)-10(6), 10(3)-10(6) and 10(2)-10(4) cfu/g, respectively. CO2-atmosphere +/- nisin inhibited the growth of Gram-negative bacteria, whereas nisin had no effect on these in vacuum packages. The Gram-negative flora on  [CLS] vacuum-packed salmon was dominated by a Vibrio sp., resembling V. marinus, Enterobacteriaceae (Enterobacter agglomerans, Serratia liquefaciens and Rahnella aquatilis) and occasionally Aeromonas hydrophila [CLS] . Irrespective of the addition of nisin and/or CO2-atmosphere, the LAB microflora was dominated by Carnobacterium piscicola, which was found to account for 87% of the 255 LAB isolates characterized."]]
["bb_dev_123", [" dominated by a Vibrio sp., resembling V. marinus, Enterobacteriaceae (Enterobacter agglomerans, Serratia liquefaciens and Rahnella aquatilis) and occasionally Aeromonas hydrophila. Irrespective of the addition of nisin and/or CO2-atmosphere, the  [CLS] LAB microflora was dominated by Carnobacterium piscicola [CLS] , which was found to account for 87% of the 255 LAB isolates characterized. Whole-cell-protein patterns analysed by SDS-PAGE confirmed the Carnobacterium species identification. The spoilage potential of C. piscicola"]]
["bb_dev_124", [" dominated by a Vibrio sp., resembling V. marinus, Enterobacteriaceae (Enterobacter agglomerans, Serratia liquefaciens and Rahnella aquatilis) and occasionally Aeromonas hydrophila. Irrespective of the addition of nisin and/or CO2-atmosphere, the  [CLS] LAB microflora was dominated by Carnobacterium piscicola [CLS] , which was found to account for 87% of the 255 LAB isolates characterized. Whole-cell-protein patterns analysed by SDS-PAGE confirmed the Carnobacterium species identification. The spoilage potential of C. piscicola"]]
["bb_dev_125", [" the Carnobacterium species identification. The spoilage potential of C. piscicola isolates was further studied by inoculation of approx. 10(6) cfu/g in cold-smoked salmon stored at 5 degrees C. The  [CLS] salmon did not spoil within 4 weeks of storage in vacuum- or CO2-atmosphere, and it is concluded that despite high levels (> 10(7) cfu/g) of C. piscicola [CLS] , sensory rejection was caused by autolytic changes. This was supported by the development of soft texture and sour, rancid and bitter off-flavours at the point of spoilage, irrespective of"]]
["bb_dev_126", [" is costly. This study was designed to compare the efficacy, patient compliance and cost of short-term PPI-based triple therapy with those of bismuth-based triple therapy.\nNinety patients with active  [CLS] duodenal ulcer disease and H pylori [CLS]  infection, proven with the 13C-urea breath test and CLO test (Campylobacter-like organism test) were treated randomly in three therapeutic groups: Group A, DeNol 120 mg, amoxicillin 500 mg and", " is costly. This study was designed to compare the efficacy, patient compliance and cost of short-term PPI-based triple therapy with those of bismuth-based triple therapy.\nNinety patients with active  [CLS] duodenal ulcer disease and H pylori [CLS]  infection, proven with the 13C-urea breath test and CLO test (Campylobacter-like organism test) were treated randomly in three therapeutic groups: Group A, DeNol 120 mg, amoxicillin 500 mg and", " eradication rate but is costly. This study was designed to compare the efficacy, patient compliance and cost of short-term PPI-based triple therapy with those of bismuth-based triple therapy.\nNinety  [CLS] patients with active duodenal ulcer disease and H pylori infection [CLS] , proven with the 13C-urea breath test and CLO test (Campylobacter-like organism test) were treated randomly in three therapeutic groups: Group A, DeNol 120 mg, amoxicillin 500 mg and metronidazole", " for the eradication of H pylori. A therapeutic regime of one week's duration with lower cost, good compliance and mild side-effects may offer a good choice for treatment of  [CLS] duodenal ulcer associated with H pylori [CLS]  infection in clinical practice.\n\n", " for the eradication of H pylori. A therapeutic regime of one week's duration with lower cost, good compliance and mild side-effects may offer a good choice for treatment of  [CLS] duodenal ulcer associated with H pylori [CLS]  infection in clinical practice.\n\n"]]
["bb_dev_127", [" [CLS] Gouda or Cheddar, degradation of protein \ninto amino acids and subsequent conversion of amino acids by Lactococcus sp. [CLS]  and/or Lactobacillus sp. is crucial for flavour development (Smit et al. 2000; Visser 1993). Other examples of microorganisms involved in the formation of very diverse flavours in dairy products", " [CLS] semi-hard cheeses, like Gouda or Cheddar, degradation of protein \ninto amino acids and subsequent conversion of amino acids by Lactococcus sp. [CLS]  and/or Lactobacillus sp. is crucial for flavour development (Smit et al. 2000; Visser 1993). Other examples of microorganisms involved in the formation of very diverse flavours in dairy products", " [CLS] Cheddar, degradation of protein \ninto amino acids and subsequent conversion of amino acids by Lactococcus sp. [CLS]  and/or Lactobacillus sp. is crucial for flavour development (Smit et al. 2000; Visser 1993). Other examples of microorganisms involved in the formation of very diverse flavours in dairy products"]]
["bb_dev_128", [" [CLS] Cheddar, degradation of protein \ninto amino acids and subsequent conversion of amino acids by Lactococcus sp. and/or Lactobacillus sp. [CLS]  is crucial for flavour development (Smit et al. 2000; Visser 1993). Other examples of microorganisms involved in the formation of very diverse flavours in dairy products are Propionibacterium sp.", " [CLS] semi-hard cheeses, like Gouda or Cheddar, degradation of protein \ninto amino acids and subsequent conversion of amino acids by Lactococcus sp. and/or Lactobacillus sp. [CLS]  is crucial for flavour development (Smit et al. 2000; Visser 1993). Other examples of microorganisms involved in the formation of very diverse flavours in dairy products are Propionibacterium sp.", " [CLS] Gouda or Cheddar, degradation of protein \ninto amino acids and subsequent conversion of amino acids by Lactococcus sp. and/or Lactobacillus sp. [CLS]  is crucial for flavour development (Smit et al. 2000; Visser 1993). Other examples of microorganisms involved in the formation of very diverse flavours in dairy products are Propionibacterium sp."]]
["bb_dev_129", [" Lactobacillus sp. is crucial for flavour development (Smit et al. 2000; Visser 1993). Other examples of microorganisms involved in the formation of very diverse flavours in dairy products are  [CLS] Propionibacterium sp. in Maasdammer and Swiss-type cheeses [CLS]  (Sarkar and Misra 1995), Streptococcus sp., Lb. bulgaricus spp. and Bifidobacterium sp. in (health-promoting) yoghurts (Nosova et al. 2000; Zourari et al. 1992; Hugenholtz et al. 2000), and Arthrobacter,", " Lactobacillus sp. is crucial for flavour development (Smit et al. 2000; Visser 1993). Other examples of microorganisms involved in the formation of very diverse flavours in dairy products are  [CLS] Propionibacterium sp. in Maasdammer [CLS]  and Swiss-type cheeses (Sarkar and Misra 1995), Streptococcus sp., Lb. bulgaricus spp. and Bifidobacterium sp. in (health-promoting) yoghurts (Nosova et al. 2000; Zourari et al. 1992; Hugenholtz et al.", " Lactococcus sp. and/or Lactobacillus sp. is crucial for flavour development (Smit et al. 2000; Visser 1993). Other examples of microorganisms involved in the formation of very diverse flavours in  [CLS] dairy products are Propionibacterium [CLS]  sp. in Maasdammer and Swiss-type cheeses (Sarkar and Misra 1995), Streptococcus sp., Lb. bulgaricus spp. and Bifidobacterium sp. in (health-promoting) yoghurts (Nosova et al. 2000; Zourari et al. 1992;"]]
["bb_dev_130", [" Visser 1993). Other examples of microorganisms involved in the formation of very diverse flavours in dairy products are Propionibacterium sp. in Maasdammer and Swiss-type cheeses (Sarkar and Misra 1995),  [CLS] Streptococcus sp., Lb. bulgaricus spp. and Bifidobacterium sp. in (health-promoting) yoghurts [CLS]  (Nosova et al. 2000; Zourari et al. 1992; Hugenholtz et al. 2000), and Arthrobacter, Brevibacterium and Corynebacterium sp. in surface-ripened cheeses (Bockelmann and Hoppe Seyler 2001).\n", " Lactococcus sp. and/or Lactobacillus sp. is crucial for flavour development (Smit et al. 2000; Visser 1993). Other examples of microorganisms involved in the formation of very diverse flavours in  [CLS] dairy products are Propionibacterium sp. in Maasdammer and Swiss-type cheeses (Sarkar and Misra 1995), Streptococcus sp. [CLS] , Lb. bulgaricus spp. and Bifidobacterium sp. in (health-promoting) yoghurts (Nosova et al. 2000; Zourari et al. 1992; Hugenholtz et al. 2000), and Arthrobacter, Brevibacterium and Corynebacterium sp. in surface-ripened"]]
["bb_dev_131", [" Other examples of microorganisms involved in the formation of very diverse flavours in dairy products are Propionibacterium sp. in Maasdammer and Swiss-type cheeses (Sarkar and Misra 1995), Streptococcus sp.,  [CLS] Lb. bulgaricus spp. and Bifidobacterium sp. in (health-promoting) yoghurts [CLS]  (Nosova et al. 2000; Zourari et al. 1992; Hugenholtz et al. 2000), and Arthrobacter, Brevibacterium and Corynebacterium sp. in surface-ripened cheeses (Bockelmann and Hoppe Seyler 2001).\n", " Lactococcus sp. and/or Lactobacillus sp. is crucial for flavour development (Smit et al. 2000; Visser 1993). Other examples of microorganisms involved in the formation of very diverse flavours in  [CLS] dairy products are Propionibacterium sp. in Maasdammer and Swiss-type cheeses (Sarkar and Misra 1995), Streptococcus sp., Lb. bulgaricus spp. [CLS]  and Bifidobacterium sp. in (health-promoting) yoghurts (Nosova et al. 2000; Zourari et al. 1992; Hugenholtz et al. 2000), and Arthrobacter, Brevibacterium and Corynebacterium sp. in surface-ripened cheeses (Bockelmann and"]]
["bb_dev_132", [" involved in the formation of very diverse flavours in dairy products are Propionibacterium sp. in Maasdammer and Swiss-type cheeses (Sarkar and Misra 1995), Streptococcus sp., Lb. bulgaricus spp. and  [CLS] Bifidobacterium sp. in (health-promoting) yoghurts [CLS]  (Nosova et al. 2000; Zourari et al. 1992; Hugenholtz et al. 2000), and Arthrobacter, Brevibacterium and Corynebacterium sp. in surface-ripened cheeses (Bockelmann and Hoppe Seyler 2001).\n", " Lactococcus sp. and/or Lactobacillus sp. is crucial for flavour development (Smit et al. 2000; Visser 1993). Other examples of microorganisms involved in the formation of very diverse flavours in  [CLS] dairy products are Propionibacterium sp. in Maasdammer and Swiss-type cheeses (Sarkar and Misra 1995), Streptococcus sp., Lb. bulgaricus spp. and Bifidobacterium sp. [CLS]  in (health-promoting) yoghurts (Nosova et al. 2000; Zourari et al. 1992; Hugenholtz et al. 2000), and Arthrobacter, Brevibacterium and Corynebacterium sp. in surface-ripened cheeses (Bockelmann and Hoppe Seyler 2001)."]]
["bb_dev_133", [" cheeses (Sarkar and Misra 1995), Streptococcus sp., Lb. bulgaricus spp. and Bifidobacterium sp. in (health-promoting) yoghurts (Nosova et al. 2000; Zourari et al. 1992; Hugenholtz et al. 2000), and  [CLS] Arthrobacter, Brevibacterium and Corynebacterium sp. in surface-ripened cheeses [CLS]  (Bockelmann and Hoppe Seyler 2001).\n", " Lactococcus sp. and/or Lactobacillus sp. is crucial for flavour development (Smit et al. 2000; Visser 1993). Other examples of microorganisms involved in the formation of very diverse flavours in  [CLS] dairy products are Propionibacterium sp. in Maasdammer and Swiss-type cheeses (Sarkar and Misra 1995), Streptococcus sp., Lb. bulgaricus spp. and Bifidobacterium sp. in (health-promoting) yoghurts (Nosova et al. 2000; Zourari et al. 1992; Hugenholtz et al. 2000), and Arthrobacter [CLS] , Brevibacterium and Corynebacterium sp. in surface-ripened cheeses (Bockelmann and Hoppe Seyler 2001).\n"]]
["bb_dev_134", [" Lactococcus sp. and/or Lactobacillus sp. is crucial for flavour development (Smit et al. 2000; Visser 1993). Other examples of microorganisms involved in the formation of very diverse flavours in  [CLS] dairy products are Propionibacterium sp. in Maasdammer and Swiss-type cheeses (Sarkar and Misra 1995), Streptococcus sp., Lb. bulgaricus spp. and Bifidobacterium sp. in (health-promoting) yoghurts (Nosova et al. 2000; Zourari et al. 1992; Hugenholtz et al. 2000), and Arthrobacter, Brevibacterium [CLS]  and Corynebacterium sp. in surface-ripened cheeses (Bockelmann and Hoppe Seyler 2001).\n", " (Sarkar and Misra 1995), Streptococcus sp., Lb. bulgaricus spp. and Bifidobacterium sp. in (health-promoting) yoghurts (Nosova et al. 2000; Zourari et al. 1992; Hugenholtz et al. 2000), and Arthrobacter,  [CLS] Brevibacterium and Corynebacterium sp. in surface-ripened cheeses [CLS]  (Bockelmann and Hoppe Seyler 2001).\n", " [CLS] Brevibacterium\n species were detected on the surface of cheeses [CLS] . The cluster analysis \nshowed that Gorgonzola, Taleggio and Formaggio di Fossa cheeses present \nhigh similarity in their surface bacterial composition while major \ndifferences in the DGGE", " [CLS] Brevibacterium\n species were detected on the surface of cheeses [CLS] . The cluster analysis \nshowed that Gorgonzola, Taleggio and Formaggio di Fossa cheeses present \nhigh similarity in their surface bacterial composition while major \ndifferences in the DGGE", " al., 2013). Whereas Candida persisted in the fungal portion of the community, the Proteobacteria were succeeded by Staphylococcus within the first 7 days. As the rinds matured, bacterial taxa  [CLS] Brevibacterium and Brachybacterium and fungal taxa Penicillium and Scopulariopsis\n emerged consistently as a significant fraction of the community (on \naverage, >1% in mature cheeses [CLS] ). Principal coordinate analysis shows a\n reproducible trajectory of all three communities over time ( Figure 7B),\n with the most rapid changes in composition occurring at early time", " al., 2013). Whereas Candida persisted in the fungal portion of the community, the Proteobacteria were succeeded by Staphylococcus within the first 7 days. As the rinds matured, bacterial taxa  [CLS] Brevibacterium and Brachybacterium and fungal taxa Penicillium and Scopulariopsis\n emerged consistently as a significant fraction of the community [CLS]  (on \naverage, >1% in mature cheeses). Principal coordinate analysis shows a\n reproducible trajectory of all three communities over time ( Figure 7B),\n with the most rapid", " milk ( Quigley et al., 2013). Whereas Candida persisted in the fungal portion of the community, the Proteobacteria were succeeded by Staphylococcus within the first 7 days. As the  [CLS] rinds matured, bacterial taxa Brevibacterium [CLS]  and Brachybacterium and fungal taxa Penicillium and Scopulariopsis\n emerged consistently as a significant fraction of the community (on \naverage, >1% in mature cheeses). Principal coordinate analysis shows"]]
["bb_dev_135", [" Lactococcus sp. and/or Lactobacillus sp. is crucial for flavour development (Smit et al. 2000; Visser 1993). Other examples of microorganisms involved in the formation of very diverse flavours in  [CLS] dairy products are Propionibacterium sp. in Maasdammer and Swiss-type cheeses (Sarkar and Misra 1995), Streptococcus sp., Lb. bulgaricus spp. and Bifidobacterium sp. in (health-promoting) yoghurts (Nosova et al. 2000; Zourari et al. 1992; Hugenholtz et al. 2000), and Arthrobacter, Brevibacterium and Corynebacterium sp. [CLS]  in surface-ripened cheeses (Bockelmann and Hoppe Seyler 2001).\n", " Misra 1995), Streptococcus sp., Lb. bulgaricus spp. and Bifidobacterium sp. in (health-promoting) yoghurts (Nosova et al. 2000; Zourari et al. 1992; Hugenholtz et al. 2000), and Arthrobacter, Brevibacterium and  [CLS] Corynebacterium sp. in surface-ripened cheeses [CLS]  (Bockelmann and Hoppe Seyler 2001).\n"]]
["bb_dev_136", [" [CLS] Corynebacterium ammoniagenes B1506 and Lactococcus lactis\n B1157 were able to produce considerable amounts of 3-methylbutanal [CLS]  and \n3-methylbutanol, while all other strains tested, including those closely\n related to the two above, lacked this ability.\n", " [CLS] Corynebacterium ammoniagenes B1506 and Lactococcus lactis\n B1157 were able to produce considerable amounts of 3-methylbutanal and \n3-methylbutanol [CLS] , while all other strains tested, including those closely\n related to the two above, lacked this ability.\n"]]
["bb_dev_137", [" [CLS] Lactococcus lactis\n B1157 were able to produce considerable amounts of 3-methylbutanal [CLS]  and \n3-methylbutanol, while all other strains tested, including those closely\n related to the two above, lacked this ability.\n", " [CLS] Lactococcus lactis\n B1157 were able to produce considerable amounts of 3-methylbutanal and \n3-methylbutanol [CLS] , while all other strains tested, including those closely\n related to the two above, lacked this ability.\n"]]
["bb_dev_138", [" of the co-substrate, \n\u03b1-ketoglutarate. The transaminase activity was found to be present in \nall microorganisms tested (Fig. 3A). The highest variation was observed in the Lactobacillus genus.  [CLS] L. lactis spp. and Streptococcus thermophilus\n showed the highest specific transaminase activity towards leucine [CLS]  and \ntherefore potentially produce the highest concentrations of \n\u03b1-ketoisocaproic acid, which is the substrate for the formation of \n3-methylbutanal.\n"]]
["bb_dev_139", ["\n\u03b1-ketoglutarate. The transaminase activity was found to be present in \nall microorganisms tested (Fig. 3A). The highest variation was observed in the Lactobacillus genus. L. lactis spp. and  [CLS] Streptococcus thermophilus\n showed the highest specific transaminase activity towards leucine [CLS]  and \ntherefore potentially produce the highest concentrations of \n\u03b1-ketoisocaproic acid, which is the substrate for the formation of \n3-methylbutanal.\n"]]
["bb_dev_140", [" [CLS] Lactococcus, Lactobacillus, Streptococcus and Leuconostoc, specific hydroxy acid dehydrogenase activity [CLS]  was found to be 5- to 10-fold higher than the transaminase activity.The decarboxylation of \u03b1-ketoisocaproic acid leads to the formation of 3-methylbutanal (Fig. 1). This decarboxylase activity was found", " [CLS] Lactococcus, Lactobacillus, Streptococcus and Leuconostoc, specific hydroxy acid dehydrogenase activity was found to be 5- to 10-fold higher than the transaminase activity [CLS] .The decarboxylation of \u03b1-ketoisocaproic acid leads to the formation of 3-methylbutanal (Fig. 1). This decarboxylase activity was found in only two of the strains tested (B1157 and B1506) (Fig. 3C).", " [CLS] anaerobic strains belonging to the genera Lactococcus [CLS] , Lactobacillus, Streptococcus and Leuconostoc, specific hydroxy acid dehydrogenase activity was found to be 5- to 10-fold higher than the transaminase activity.The decarboxylation of \u03b1-ketoisocaproic acid leads to the formation"]]
["bb_dev_141", [" [CLS] anaerobic strains belonging to the genera Lactococcus, Lactobacillus, Streptococcus [CLS]  and Leuconostoc, specific hydroxy acid dehydrogenase activity was found to be 5- to 10-fold higher than the transaminase activity.The decarboxylation of \u03b1-ketoisocaproic acid leads to the formation of 3-methylbutanal", " [CLS] Streptococcus and Leuconostoc, specific hydroxy acid dehydrogenase activity [CLS]  was found to be 5- to 10-fold higher than the transaminase activity.The decarboxylation of \u03b1-ketoisocaproic acid leads to the formation of 3-methylbutanal (Fig. 1). This decarboxylase activity was found", " [CLS] Streptococcus and Leuconostoc, specific hydroxy acid dehydrogenase activity was found to be 5- to 10-fold higher than the transaminase activity [CLS] .The decarboxylation of \u03b1-ketoisocaproic acid leads to the formation of 3-methylbutanal (Fig. 1). This decarboxylase activity was found in only two of the strains tested (B1157 and B1506) (Fig. 3C)."]]
["bb_dev_142", [" [CLS] Leuconostoc, specific hydroxy acid dehydrogenase activity [CLS]  was found to be 5- to 10-fold higher than the transaminase activity.The decarboxylation of \u03b1-ketoisocaproic acid leads to the formation of 3-methylbutanal (Fig. 1). This decarboxylase activity was found", " [CLS] Leuconostoc, specific hydroxy acid dehydrogenase activity was found to be 5- to 10-fold higher than the transaminase activity [CLS] .The decarboxylation of \u03b1-ketoisocaproic acid leads to the formation of 3-methylbutanal (Fig. 1). This decarboxylase activity was found in only two of the strains tested (B1157 and B1506) (Fig. 3C).", " [CLS] anaerobic strains belonging to the genera Lactococcus, Lactobacillus, Streptococcus and Leuconostoc [CLS] , specific hydroxy acid dehydrogenase activity was found to be 5- to 10-fold higher than the transaminase activity.The decarboxylation of \u03b1-ketoisocaproic acid leads to the formation of 3-methylbutanal (Fig. 1).", " \nhigh similarity in their surface bacterial composition while major \ndifferences in the DGGE profiles were observed in Scimudin and Casera. \nThe molecular taxonomical identification among the  [CLS] Gram positive \nisolates, reveals the presence of the following bacterial genera: Staphylococcus, Micrococcus, Macrococcus, Enterococcus, Lactobacillus, Carnobacterium, Leuconostoc [CLS] , Brevibacterium, Corynebacterium, Brochothrix, Bacillus.\n"]]
["bb_dev_143", [" hydroxy acid dehydrogenase activity was found to be 5- to 10-fold higher than the transaminase activity.The decarboxylation of \u03b1-ketoisocaproic acid leads to the formation of 3-methylbutanal (Fig. 1). This  [CLS] decarboxylase activity was found in only two of the strains tested (B1157 [CLS]  and B1506) (Fig. 3C).\n", " \n3-methylbutanal production clearly correlated with the presence or \nabsence of decarboxylase activity. Again the difference between L. lactis B1157 and B697 is illustrative (Fig. 3),\n with  [CLS] B1157 being decarboxylase-positive [CLS]  and B697 negative.\n"]]
["bb_dev_144", [" hydroxy acid dehydrogenase activity was found to be 5- to 10-fold higher than the transaminase activity.The decarboxylation of \u03b1-ketoisocaproic acid leads to the formation of 3-methylbutanal (Fig. 1). This  [CLS] decarboxylase activity was found in only two of the strains tested (B1157 and B1506 [CLS] ) (Fig. 3C).\n"]]
["bb_dev_145", [" [CLS] L. lactis subsp. cremoris B697, a strain with a high hydroxy acid dehydrogenase activity compared to the transaminase activity [CLS]  (Fig. 3A, B), did not produce detectable amounts of 3-methylbutanal. Interestingly, L. lactis subsp. cremoris strain B1157, a strain reported to produce high levels of 3-methylbutanal (Ayad et al.", " [CLS] L. lactis subsp. cremoris B697, a strain with a high hydroxy acid dehydrogenase activity [CLS]  compared to the transaminase activity (Fig. 3A, B), did not produce detectable amounts of 3-methylbutanal. Interestingly, L. lactis subsp. cremoris strain B1157, a strain reported to produce high levels"]]
["bb_dev_146", [" lactis subsp. cremoris B697, a strain with a high hydroxy acid dehydrogenase activity compared to the transaminase activity (Fig. 3A, B), did not produce detectable amounts of 3-methylbutanal. Interestingly,  [CLS] L. lactis subsp. cremoris strain B1157, a strain reported to produce high levels of 3-methylbutanal (Ayad et al. 1999, 2000),\n has transaminase and hydroxy acid dehydrogenase activities [CLS]  \napproximately similar to those of strain B697.\n", " lactis subsp. cremoris B697, a strain with a high hydroxy acid dehydrogenase activity compared to the transaminase activity (Fig. 3A, B), did not produce detectable amounts of 3-methylbutanal. Interestingly,  [CLS] L. lactis subsp. cremoris strain B1157, a strain reported to produce high levels of 3-methylbutanal (Ayad et al. 1999, 2000),\n has transaminase and hydroxy acid dehydrogenase activities [CLS]  \napproximately similar to those of strain B697.\n"]]
["bb_dev_147", [" not produce detectable amounts of 3-methylbutanal. Interestingly, L. lactis subsp. cremoris strain B1157, a strain reported to produce high levels of 3-methylbutanal (Ayad et al. 1999, 2000),\n has  [CLS] transaminase and hydroxy acid dehydrogenase activities \napproximately similar to those of strain B697 [CLS] .\n", " detectable amounts of 3-methylbutanal. Interestingly, L. lactis subsp. cremoris strain B1157, a strain reported to produce high levels of 3-methylbutanal (Ayad et al. 1999, 2000),\n has transaminase and  [CLS] hydroxy acid dehydrogenase activities \napproximately similar to those of strain B697 [CLS] .\n", " production clearly correlated with the presence or \nabsence of decarboxylase activity. Again the difference between L. lactis B1157 and B697 is illustrative (Fig. 3),\n with B1157 being  [CLS] decarboxylase-positive and B697 negative [CLS] .\n"]]
["bb_dev_148", [" [CLS] Staphylococcus, Micrococcus, Psychrobacter, Enterococcus and Brevibacterium\n species were detected on the surface of cheeses [CLS] . The cluster analysis \nshowed that Gorgonzola, Taleggio and Formaggio di Fossa cheeses present \nhigh similarity in their surface bacterial composition while major \ndifferences in the DGGE", " [CLS] Staphylococcus, Micrococcus, Psychrobacter, Enterococcus and Brevibacterium\n species were detected on the surface of cheeses [CLS] . The cluster analysis \nshowed that Gorgonzola, Taleggio and Formaggio di Fossa cheeses present \nhigh similarity in their surface bacterial composition while major \ndifferences in the DGGE", " [CLS] community of Staphylococcus and micrococci-corynebacteria groups [CLS]  on the cheese surfaces. Although E. faecium DNA was present in Formaggio di Fossa, no presumptive enterococci were found on Enterococcus\n selective agar (SB), though they were detected", " [CLS] Staphylococcus and micrococci-corynebacteria groups on the cheese [CLS]  surfaces. Although E. faecium DNA was present in Formaggio di Fossa, no presumptive enterococci were found on Enterococcus\n selective agar (SB), though they were detected in different amounts", " [CLS] Staphylococcus and micrococci-corynebacteria groups on the cheese surfaces [CLS] . Although E. faecium DNA was present in Formaggio di Fossa, no presumptive enterococci were found on Enterococcus\n selective agar (SB), though they were detected in different amounts in", " found in high abundance on moist bloomy rinds ( Figure S2C), are positively correlated with moisture (Figure 3D), whereas several other fungal and bacterial taxa (Scopulariopsis, Aspergillus, Actinobacteria, and  [CLS] Staphylococcus), which are abundant on dry natural rinds [CLS]  ( Figure S2C), are negatively associated with moisture (Figure 3D).\n", " [CLS] cheese over a\n 63-day aging period demonstrates that patterns of succession are highly\n reproducible (Figures 7A and 7B). At the first time point, the community consisted primarily of Proteobacteria, the bacterium Leuconostoc, and the yeast Candida, which can be found at low levels in raw milk ( Quigley et al., 2013). Whereas Candida persisted in the fungal portion of the community, the Proteobacteria were succeeded by Staphylococcus [CLS]  within the first 7 days. As the rinds matured, bacterial taxa Brevibacterium and Brachybacterium and fungal taxa Penicillium and Scopulariopsis\n emerged consistently as a significant fraction of the"]]
["bb_dev_149", [" [CLS] Micrococcus, Psychrobacter, Enterococcus and Brevibacterium\n species were detected on the surface of cheeses [CLS] . The cluster analysis \nshowed that Gorgonzola, Taleggio and Formaggio di Fossa cheeses present \nhigh similarity in their surface bacterial composition while major \ndifferences in the DGGE", " [CLS] Micrococcus, Psychrobacter, Enterococcus and Brevibacterium\n species were detected on the surface of cheeses [CLS] . The cluster analysis \nshowed that Gorgonzola, Taleggio and Formaggio di Fossa cheeses present \nhigh similarity in their surface bacterial composition while major \ndifferences in the DGGE"]]
["bb_dev_150", [" [CLS] Psychrobacter, Enterococcus and Brevibacterium\n species were detected on the surface of cheeses [CLS] . The cluster analysis \nshowed that Gorgonzola, Taleggio and Formaggio di Fossa cheeses present \nhigh similarity in their surface bacterial composition while major \ndifferences in the DGGE", " [CLS] Psychrobacter, Enterococcus and Brevibacterium\n species were detected on the surface of cheeses [CLS] . The cluster analysis \nshowed that Gorgonzola, Taleggio and Formaggio di Fossa cheeses present \nhigh similarity in their surface bacterial composition while major \ndifferences in the DGGE", " [CLS] Psychrobacter species were evident in Formaggio di Fossa [CLS] , Gorgonzola, Taleggio and Scimudin. DGGE band \u201cd\u201d identified as Staphylococcus equorum was present in all cheese profiles, with the most intense signal in Casera. Micrococcus luteus (band \u201cl\u201d) was", " [CLS] Psychrobacter species were evident in Formaggio di Fossa, Gorgonzola [CLS] , Taleggio and Scimudin. DGGE band \u201cd\u201d identified as Staphylococcus equorum was present in all cheese profiles, with the most intense signal in Casera. Micrococcus luteus (band \u201cl\u201d) was detected", " [CLS] Psychrobacter species were evident in Formaggio di Fossa, Gorgonzola, Taleggio [CLS]  and Scimudin. DGGE band \u201cd\u201d identified as Staphylococcus equorum was present in all cheese profiles, with the most intense signal in Casera. Micrococcus luteus (band \u201cl\u201d) was detected in", " [CLS] Psychrobacter species were evident in Formaggio di Fossa, Gorgonzola, Taleggio and Scimudin [CLS] . DGGE band \u201cd\u201d identified as Staphylococcus equorum was present in all cheese profiles, with the most intense signal in Casera. Micrococcus luteus (band \u201cl\u201d) was detected in all samples", " [CLS] Psychrobacter DNA on the surface of Formaggio di \nFossa cheese [CLS] .\n", " [CLS] Psychrobacter DNA on the surface of Formaggio di \nFossa cheese [CLS] .\n"]]
["bb_dev_151", [" \nhigh similarity in their surface bacterial composition while major \ndifferences in the DGGE profiles were observed in Scimudin and Casera. \nThe molecular taxonomical identification among the  [CLS] Gram positive \nisolates, reveals the presence of the following bacterial genera: Staphylococcus [CLS] , Micrococcus, Macrococcus, Enterococcus, Lactobacillus, Carnobacterium, Leuconostoc, Brevibacterium, Corynebacterium, Brochothrix, Bacillus.\n", " [CLS] Gram positive, catalase positive, salt-tolerant \nmicrobial communities composed mainly of coagulase-negative cocci (CNC) \nand coryneform bacteria, belonging to genera such as Staphylococcus [CLS] , Micrococcus, Brevibacterium, and Arthrobacter ( Bockelmann, 1999, Bockelmann et al., 1997, Corsetti et al., 2001, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995a, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995b and Vald\u00e9s-Stauber et al., 1997)\n", " [CLS] catalase positive, salt-tolerant \nmicrobial communities composed mainly of coagulase-negative cocci (CNC) \nand coryneform bacteria, belonging to genera such as Staphylococcus [CLS] , Micrococcus, Brevibacterium, and Arthrobacter ( Bockelmann, 1999, Bockelmann et al., 1997, Corsetti et al., 2001, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995a, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995b and Vald\u00e9s-Stauber et al., 1997)\n", " [CLS] salt-tolerant \nmicrobial communities composed mainly of coagulase-negative cocci (CNC) \nand coryneform bacteria, belonging to genera such as Staphylococcus [CLS] , Micrococcus, Brevibacterium, and Arthrobacter ( Bockelmann, 1999, Bockelmann et al., 1997, Corsetti et al., 2001, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995a, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995b and Vald\u00e9s-Stauber et al., 1997)\n", " [CLS] coagulase-negative cocci (CNC) \nand coryneform bacteria, belonging to genera such as Staphylococcus [CLS] , Micrococcus, Brevibacterium, and Arthrobacter ( Bockelmann, 1999, Bockelmann et al., 1997, Corsetti et al., 2001, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995a, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995b and Vald\u00e9s-Stauber et al., 1997)\n", " addition, the \nproduction of growth factors by yeasts appears to promote the \ndevelopment of a Gram positive, catalase positive, salt-tolerant \nmicrobial communities composed mainly of coagulase-negative  [CLS] cocci (CNC) \nand coryneform bacteria, belonging to genera such as Staphylococcus [CLS] , Micrococcus, Brevibacterium, and Arthrobacter ( Bockelmann, 1999, Bockelmann et al., 1997, Corsetti et al., 2001, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995a, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995b and Vald\u00e9s-Stauber et al., 1997)\n"]]
["bb_dev_152", [" \nhigh similarity in their surface bacterial composition while major \ndifferences in the DGGE profiles were observed in Scimudin and Casera. \nThe molecular taxonomical identification among the  [CLS] Gram positive \nisolates, reveals the presence of the following bacterial genera: Staphylococcus, Micrococcus [CLS] , Macrococcus, Enterococcus, Lactobacillus, Carnobacterium, Leuconostoc, Brevibacterium, Corynebacterium, Brochothrix, Bacillus.\n", " [CLS] coagulase-negative cocci (CNC) \nand coryneform bacteria, belonging to genera such as Staphylococcus, Micrococcus [CLS] , Brevibacterium, and Arthrobacter ( Bockelmann, 1999, Bockelmann et al., 1997, Corsetti et al., 2001, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995a, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995b and Vald\u00e9s-Stauber et al., 1997)\n", " [CLS] catalase positive, salt-tolerant \nmicrobial communities composed mainly of coagulase-negative cocci (CNC) \nand coryneform bacteria, belonging to genera such as Staphylococcus, Micrococcus [CLS] , Brevibacterium, and Arthrobacter ( Bockelmann, 1999, Bockelmann et al., 1997, Corsetti et al., 2001, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995a, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995b and Vald\u00e9s-Stauber et al., 1997)\n", " addition, the \nproduction of growth factors by yeasts appears to promote the \ndevelopment of a Gram positive, catalase positive, salt-tolerant \nmicrobial communities composed mainly of coagulase-negative  [CLS] cocci (CNC) \nand coryneform bacteria, belonging to genera such as Staphylococcus, Micrococcus [CLS] , Brevibacterium, and Arthrobacter ( Bockelmann, 1999, Bockelmann et al., 1997, Corsetti et al., 2001, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995a, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995b and Vald\u00e9s-Stauber et al., 1997)\n", " [CLS] salt-tolerant \nmicrobial communities composed mainly of coagulase-negative cocci (CNC) \nand coryneform bacteria, belonging to genera such as Staphylococcus, Micrococcus [CLS] , Brevibacterium, and Arthrobacter ( Bockelmann, 1999, Bockelmann et al., 1997, Corsetti et al., 2001, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995a, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995b and Vald\u00e9s-Stauber et al., 1997)\n", " [CLS] Gram positive, catalase positive, salt-tolerant \nmicrobial communities composed mainly of coagulase-negative cocci (CNC) \nand coryneform bacteria, belonging to genera such as Staphylococcus, Micrococcus [CLS] , Brevibacterium, and Arthrobacter ( Bockelmann, 1999, Bockelmann et al., 1997, Corsetti et al., 2001, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995a, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995b and Vald\u00e9s-Stauber et al., 1997)\n"]]
["bb_dev_153", [" \nhigh similarity in their surface bacterial composition while major \ndifferences in the DGGE profiles were observed in Scimudin and Casera. \nThe molecular taxonomical identification among the  [CLS] Gram positive \nisolates, reveals the presence of the following bacterial genera: Staphylococcus, Micrococcus, Macrococcus [CLS] , Enterococcus, Lactobacillus, Carnobacterium, Leuconostoc, Brevibacterium, Corynebacterium, Brochothrix, Bacillus.\n"]]
["bb_dev_154", [" \nhigh similarity in their surface bacterial composition while major \ndifferences in the DGGE profiles were observed in Scimudin and Casera. \nThe molecular taxonomical identification among the  [CLS] Gram positive \nisolates, reveals the presence of the following bacterial genera: Staphylococcus, Micrococcus, Macrococcus, Enterococcus, Lactobacillus, Carnobacterium [CLS] , Leuconostoc, Brevibacterium, Corynebacterium, Brochothrix, Bacillus.\n"]]
["bb_dev_155", [" \nhigh similarity in their surface bacterial composition while major \ndifferences in the DGGE profiles were observed in Scimudin and Casera. \nThe molecular taxonomical identification among the  [CLS] Gram positive \nisolates, reveals the presence of the following bacterial genera: Staphylococcus, Micrococcus, Macrococcus, Enterococcus, Lactobacillus, Carnobacterium, Leuconostoc, Brevibacterium [CLS] , Corynebacterium, Brochothrix, Bacillus.\n", " [CLS] coagulase-negative cocci (CNC) \nand coryneform bacteria, belonging to genera such as Staphylococcus, Micrococcus, Brevibacterium [CLS] , and Arthrobacter ( Bockelmann, 1999, Bockelmann et al., 1997, Corsetti et al., 2001, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995a, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995b and Vald\u00e9s-Stauber et al., 1997)\n", " [CLS] catalase positive, salt-tolerant \nmicrobial communities composed mainly of coagulase-negative cocci (CNC) \nand coryneform bacteria, belonging to genera such as Staphylococcus, Micrococcus, Brevibacterium [CLS] , and Arthrobacter ( Bockelmann, 1999, Bockelmann et al., 1997, Corsetti et al., 2001, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995a, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995b and Vald\u00e9s-Stauber et al., 1997)\n", " [CLS] Gram positive, catalase positive, salt-tolerant \nmicrobial communities composed mainly of coagulase-negative cocci (CNC) \nand coryneform bacteria, belonging to genera such as Staphylococcus, Micrococcus, Brevibacterium [CLS] , and Arthrobacter ( Bockelmann, 1999, Bockelmann et al., 1997, Corsetti et al., 2001, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995a, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995b and Vald\u00e9s-Stauber et al., 1997)\n", " [CLS] salt-tolerant \nmicrobial communities composed mainly of coagulase-negative cocci (CNC) \nand coryneform bacteria, belonging to genera such as Staphylococcus, Micrococcus, Brevibacterium [CLS] , and Arthrobacter ( Bockelmann, 1999, Bockelmann et al., 1997, Corsetti et al., 2001, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995a, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995b and Vald\u00e9s-Stauber et al., 1997)\n"]]
["bb_dev_156", [" \nhigh similarity in their surface bacterial composition while major \ndifferences in the DGGE profiles were observed in Scimudin and Casera. \nThe molecular taxonomical identification among the  [CLS] Gram positive \nisolates, reveals the presence of the following bacterial genera: Staphylococcus, Micrococcus, Macrococcus, Enterococcus, Lactobacillus, Carnobacterium, Leuconostoc, Brevibacterium, Corynebacterium [CLS] , Brochothrix, Bacillus.\n"]]
["bb_dev_157", [" \nhigh similarity in their surface bacterial composition while major \ndifferences in the DGGE profiles were observed in Scimudin and Casera. \nThe molecular taxonomical identification among the  [CLS] Gram positive \nisolates, reveals the presence of the following bacterial genera: Staphylococcus, Micrococcus, Macrococcus, Enterococcus, Lactobacillus, Carnobacterium, Leuconostoc, Brevibacterium, Corynebacterium, Brochothrix [CLS] , Bacillus.\n"]]
["bb_dev_158", [" \nhigh similarity in their surface bacterial composition while major \ndifferences in the DGGE profiles were observed in Scimudin and Casera. \nThe molecular taxonomical identification among the  [CLS] Gram positive \nisolates, reveals the presence of the following bacterial genera: Staphylococcus, Micrococcus, Macrococcus, Enterococcus, Lactobacillus, Carnobacterium, Leuconostoc, Brevibacterium, Corynebacterium, Brochothrix, Bacillus [CLS] .\n"]]
["bb_dev_159", [" [CLS] catalase positive, salt-tolerant \nmicrobial communities composed mainly of coagulase-negative cocci (CNC) \nand coryneform bacteria, belonging to genera such as Staphylococcus, Micrococcus, Brevibacterium, and Arthrobacter [CLS]  ( Bockelmann, 1999, Bockelmann et al., 1997, Corsetti et al., 2001, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995a, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995b and Vald\u00e9s-Stauber et al., 1997)\n", " [CLS] salt-tolerant \nmicrobial communities composed mainly of coagulase-negative cocci (CNC) \nand coryneform bacteria, belonging to genera such as Staphylococcus, Micrococcus, Brevibacterium, and Arthrobacter [CLS]  ( Bockelmann, 1999, Bockelmann et al., 1997, Corsetti et al., 2001, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995a, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995b and Vald\u00e9s-Stauber et al., 1997)\n", " [CLS] coagulase-negative cocci (CNC) \nand coryneform bacteria, belonging to genera such as Staphylococcus, Micrococcus, Brevibacterium, and Arthrobacter [CLS]  ( Bockelmann, 1999, Bockelmann et al., 1997, Corsetti et al., 2001, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995a, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995b and Vald\u00e9s-Stauber et al., 1997)\n", " [CLS] Gram positive, catalase positive, salt-tolerant \nmicrobial communities composed mainly of coagulase-negative cocci (CNC) \nand coryneform bacteria, belonging to genera such as Staphylococcus, Micrococcus, Brevibacterium, and Arthrobacter [CLS]  ( Bockelmann, 1999, Bockelmann et al., 1997, Corsetti et al., 2001, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995a, Eliskases-Lechner and Ginzinger, 1995b and Vald\u00e9s-Stauber et al., 1997)\n"]]
["bb_dev_160", [" [CLS] Staphylococcus equorum was present in all cheese [CLS]  profiles, with the most intense signal in Casera. Micrococcus luteus (band \u201cl\u201d) was detected in all samples except for Casera cheese, while the band for S. vitulinus (band \u201cc\u201d)", " [CLS] Staphylococcus equorum was present in all cheese profiles, with the most intense signal in Casera [CLS] . Micrococcus luteus (band \u201cl\u201d) was detected in all samples except for Casera cheese, while the band for S. vitulinus (band \u201cc\u201d) was only evident in Scimudin. A faint DNA"]]
["bb_dev_161", [" present in all cheese profiles, with the most intense signal in Casera. Micrococcus luteus (band \u201cl\u201d) was detected in all samples except for Casera cheese, while the band for  [CLS] S. vitulinus (band \u201cc\u201d) was only evident in Scimudin [CLS] . A faint DNA band of Lactobacillus delbrueckii (band \u201cf\u201d) could be detected in Casera and Gorgonzola cheeses, as well as faint Streptococcus thermophilus band (\u201ck\u201d) in the Casera and", " [CLS] Scimudin cheese, revealed as major bands M. luteus and P. glacincolaus and the presence of S. vitulinus [CLS] . DGGE analysis of Casera Valtellina, a cheese characterized by low water activity of the rind, showed a surface composed by S. equorum, B. linens and B. casei\n as", " [CLS] white mould rind, Scimudin cheese, revealed as major bands M. luteus and P. glacincolaus and the presence of S. vitulinus [CLS] . DGGE analysis of Casera Valtellina, a cheese characterized by low water activity of the rind, showed a surface composed by S. equorum, B. linens and B. casei\n as"]]
["bb_dev_162", [" (band \u201cl\u201d) was detected in all samples except for Casera cheese, while the band for S. vitulinus (band \u201cc\u201d) was only evident in Scimudin. A faint DNA band of  [CLS] Lactobacillus delbrueckii (band \u201cf\u201d) could be detected in Casera and Gorgonzola cheeses [CLS] , as well as faint Streptococcus thermophilus band (\u201ck\u201d) in the Casera and Formaggio di Fossa samples. Enterococcus faecium\n band (band \u201cj\u201d) was detected in Casera cheese, and showed", " (band \u201cl\u201d) was detected in all samples except for Casera cheese, while the band for S. vitulinus (band \u201cc\u201d) was only evident in Scimudin. A faint DNA band of  [CLS] Lactobacillus delbrueckii (band \u201cf\u201d) could be detected in Casera and Gorgonzola cheeses [CLS] , as well as faint Streptococcus thermophilus band (\u201ck\u201d) in the Casera and Formaggio di Fossa samples. Enterococcus faecium\n band (band \u201cj\u201d) was detected in Casera cheese, and showed"]]
["bb_dev_163", [" vitulinus (band \u201cc\u201d) was only evident in Scimudin. A faint DNA band of Lactobacillus delbrueckii (band \u201cf\u201d) could be detected in Casera and Gorgonzola cheeses, as well as faint  [CLS] Streptococcus thermophilus band (\u201ck\u201d) in the Casera [CLS]  and Formaggio di Fossa samples. Enterococcus faecium\n band (band \u201cj\u201d) was detected in Casera cheese, and showed less \nintensity in Formaggio di Fossa and Scimudin cheeses. DGGE", " vitulinus (band \u201cc\u201d) was only evident in Scimudin. A faint DNA band of Lactobacillus delbrueckii (band \u201cf\u201d) could be detected in Casera and Gorgonzola cheeses, as well as faint  [CLS] Streptococcus thermophilus band (\u201ck\u201d) in the Casera and Formaggio di Fossa [CLS]  samples. Enterococcus faecium\n band (band \u201cj\u201d) was detected in Casera cheese, and showed less \nintensity in Formaggio di Fossa and Scimudin cheeses. DGGE bands of Brevibacterium casei"]]
["bb_dev_164", [" of Lactobacillus delbrueckii (band \u201cf\u201d) could be detected in Casera and Gorgonzola cheeses, as well as faint Streptococcus thermophilus band (\u201ck\u201d) in the Casera and Formaggio di Fossa samples.  [CLS] Enterococcus faecium\n band (band \u201cj\u201d) was detected in Casera cheese [CLS] , and showed less \nintensity in Formaggio di Fossa and Scimudin cheeses. DGGE bands of Brevibacterium casei (bands \u201cn\u201d) and B. linens (band \u201cm\u201d) could only be observed in", " of Lactobacillus delbrueckii (band \u201cf\u201d) could be detected in Casera and Gorgonzola cheeses, as well as faint Streptococcus thermophilus band (\u201ck\u201d) in the Casera and Formaggio di Fossa samples.  [CLS] Enterococcus faecium\n band (band \u201cj\u201d) was detected in Casera cheese, and showed less \nintensity in Formaggio di Fossa and Scimudin cheeses [CLS] . DGGE bands of Brevibacterium casei (bands \u201cn\u201d) and B. linens (band \u201cm\u201d) could only be observed in Casera cheese surface.\n", " of Lactobacillus delbrueckii (band \u201cf\u201d) could be detected in Casera and Gorgonzola cheeses, as well as faint Streptococcus thermophilus band (\u201ck\u201d) in the Casera and Formaggio di Fossa samples.  [CLS] Enterococcus faecium\n band (band \u201cj\u201d) was detected in Casera cheese, and showed less \nintensity in Formaggio di Fossa and Scimudin cheeses [CLS] . DGGE bands of Brevibacterium casei (bands \u201cn\u201d) and B. linens (band \u201cm\u201d) could only be observed in Casera cheese surface.\n"]]
["bb_dev_165", [" di Fossa samples. Enterococcus faecium\n band (band \u201cj\u201d) was detected in Casera cheese, and showed less \nintensity in Formaggio di Fossa and Scimudin cheeses. DGGE bands of  [CLS] Brevibacterium casei (bands \u201cn\u201d) and B. linens (band \u201cm\u201d) could only be observed in Casera cheese [CLS]  surface.\n", " di Fossa samples. Enterococcus faecium\n band (band \u201cj\u201d) was detected in Casera cheese, and showed less \nintensity in Formaggio di Fossa and Scimudin cheeses. DGGE bands of  [CLS] Brevibacterium casei (bands \u201cn\u201d) and B. linens (band \u201cm\u201d) could only be observed in Casera cheese surface [CLS] .\n"]]
["bb_dev_166", ["\n band (band \u201cj\u201d) was detected in Casera cheese, and showed less \nintensity in Formaggio di Fossa and Scimudin cheeses. DGGE bands of Brevibacterium casei (bands \u201cn\u201d) and  [CLS] B. linens (band \u201cm\u201d) could only be observed in Casera cheese surface [CLS] .\n", "\n band (band \u201cj\u201d) was detected in Casera cheese, and showed less \nintensity in Formaggio di Fossa and Scimudin cheeses. DGGE bands of Brevibacterium casei (bands \u201cn\u201d) and  [CLS] B. linens (band \u201cm\u201d) could only be observed in Casera cheese [CLS]  surface.\n", " culture independent analysis of \nthe white mould rind, Scimudin cheese, revealed as major bands M. luteus and P. glacincolaus and the presence of S. vitulinus. DGGE analysis of  [CLS] Casera Valtellina, a cheese characterized by low water activity of the rind, showed a surface composed by S. equorum, B. linens [CLS]  and B. casei\n as the main bacterial species.\n", " [CLS] B. linens\n was only isolated from the Casera, Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheese [CLS]  \nsurfaces, confirming the more recent information that this species is \nnot the most important bacterium on smear cheeses.\n", " [CLS] B. linens\n was only isolated from the Casera, Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheese [CLS]  \nsurfaces, confirming the more recent information that this species is \nnot the most important bacterium on smear cheeses.\n", " [CLS] B. linens\n was only isolated from the Casera, Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheese \nsurfaces [CLS] , confirming the more recent information that this species is \nnot the most important bacterium on smear cheeses.\n", " [CLS] B. linens\n was only isolated from the Casera, Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheese \nsurfaces [CLS] , confirming the more recent information that this species is \nnot the most important bacterium on smear cheeses.\n", " [CLS] B. linens\n was only isolated from the Casera, Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheese \nsurfaces, confirming the more recent information that this species is \nnot the most important bacterium on smear cheeses [CLS] .\n", " [CLS] B. linens\n was only isolated from the Casera, Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheese \nsurfaces [CLS] , confirming the more recent information that this species is \nnot the most important bacterium on smear cheeses.\n", " [CLS] B. linens\n was only isolated from the Casera, Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheese [CLS]  \nsurfaces, confirming the more recent information that this species is \nnot the most important bacterium on smear cheeses.\n"]]
["bb_dev_167", [" [CLS] micrococci-corynebacteria groups on the cheese surfaces [CLS] . Although E. faecium DNA was present in Formaggio di Fossa, no presumptive enterococci were found on Enterococcus\n selective agar (SB), though they were detected in different amounts in", " [CLS] community of Staphylococcus and micrococci-corynebacteria groups [CLS]  on the cheese surfaces. Although E. faecium DNA was present in Formaggio di Fossa, no presumptive enterococci were found on Enterococcus\n selective agar (SB), though they were detected", " [CLS] micrococci-corynebacteria groups on the cheese [CLS]  surfaces. Although E. faecium DNA was present in Formaggio di Fossa, no presumptive enterococci were found on Enterococcus\n selective agar (SB), though they were detected in different amounts"]]
["bb_dev_168", [" [CLS] corynebacteria groups on the cheese surfaces [CLS] . Although E. faecium DNA was present in Formaggio di Fossa, no presumptive enterococci were found on Enterococcus\n selective agar (SB), though they were detected in different amounts in", " [CLS] community of Staphylococcus and micrococci-corynebacteria groups [CLS]  on the cheese surfaces. Although E. faecium DNA was present in Formaggio di Fossa, no presumptive enterococci were found on Enterococcus\n selective agar (SB), though they were detected", " [CLS] corynebacteria groups on the cheese [CLS]  surfaces. Although E. faecium DNA was present in Formaggio di Fossa, no presumptive enterococci were found on Enterococcus\n selective agar (SB), though they were detected in different amounts"]]
["bb_dev_169", [" [CLS] E. faecium DNA was present in Formaggio di Fossa [CLS] , no presumptive enterococci were found on Enterococcus\n selective agar (SB), though they were detected in different amounts in \nCasera, Taleggio, Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses. Lactobacilli were "]]
["bb_dev_170", [" revealed \nthe presence of a large community of Staphylococcus and micrococci-corynebacteria groups on the cheese surfaces. Although E. faecium DNA was present in Formaggio di Fossa, no presumptive  [CLS] enterococci were found on Enterococcus\n selective agar (SB), though they were detected in different amounts in \nCasera, Taleggio, Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses [CLS] . Lactobacilli were \nalso detected using Rogosa agar in all cheese surfaces in a range of 104\u2013106 CFU/cm2. The counts obtained on Pseudomonas agar were high in Gorgonzola, Scimudin", " revealed \nthe presence of a large community of Staphylococcus and micrococci-corynebacteria groups on the cheese surfaces. Although E. faecium DNA was present in Formaggio di Fossa, no presumptive  [CLS] enterococci were found on Enterococcus\n selective agar (SB), though they were detected in different amounts in \nCasera, Taleggio, Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses [CLS] . Lactobacilli were \nalso detected using Rogosa agar in all cheese surfaces in a range of 104\u2013106 CFU/cm2. The counts obtained on Pseudomonas agar were high in Gorgonzola, Scimudin", " revealed \nthe presence of a large community of Staphylococcus and micrococci-corynebacteria groups on the cheese surfaces. Although E. faecium DNA was present in Formaggio di Fossa, no presumptive  [CLS] enterococci were found on Enterococcus\n selective agar (SB), though they were detected in different amounts in \nCasera, Taleggio, Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses [CLS] . Lactobacilli were \nalso detected using Rogosa agar in all cheese surfaces in a range of 104\u2013106 CFU/cm2. The counts obtained on Pseudomonas agar were high in Gorgonzola, Scimudin", " revealed \nthe presence of a large community of Staphylococcus and micrococci-corynebacteria groups on the cheese surfaces. Although E. faecium DNA was present in Formaggio di Fossa, no presumptive  [CLS] enterococci were found on Enterococcus\n selective agar (SB), though they were detected in different amounts in \nCasera, Taleggio, Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses [CLS] . Lactobacilli were \nalso detected using Rogosa agar in all cheese surfaces in a range of 104\u2013106 CFU/cm2. The counts obtained on Pseudomonas agar were high in Gorgonzola, Scimudin", " on Scimudin (107 CFU/cm2) and Gorgonzola (105 CFU/cm2) surfaces than on Fontina rind (104 CFU/cm2) as reported by Dolci et al. (2009) while Cocolin et al. (2009) obtained diverse  [CLS] enterococci counts, with variation between 103\u2013108 CFU/g\n within the 18 samples of Gorgonzola [CLS]  rinds analyzed.\n", " on Scimudin (107 CFU/cm2) and Gorgonzola (105 CFU/cm2) surfaces than on Fontina rind (104 CFU/cm2) as reported by Dolci et al. (2009) while Cocolin et al. (2009) obtained diverse  [CLS] enterococci counts, with variation between 103\u2013108 CFU/g\n within the 18 samples of Gorgonzola rinds [CLS]  analyzed.\n"]]
["bb_dev_171", [" Formaggio di Fossa, no presumptive enterococci were found on Enterococcus\n selective agar (SB), though they were detected in different amounts in \nCasera, Taleggio, Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses.  [CLS] Lactobacilli were \nalso detected using Rogosa agar in all cheese surfaces [CLS]  in a range of 104\u2013106 CFU/cm2. The counts obtained on Pseudomonas agar were high in Gorgonzola, Scimudin and Taleggio surfaces (108 CFU/cm2), while in Casera samples the Pseudomonas values"]]
["bb_dev_172", [" \nCasera, Taleggio, Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses. Lactobacilli were \nalso detected using Rogosa agar in all cheese surfaces in a range of 104\u2013106 CFU/cm2. The counts obtained on  [CLS] Pseudomonas agar were high in Gorgonzola [CLS] , Scimudin and Taleggio surfaces (108 CFU/cm2), while in Casera samples the Pseudomonas values were three log units lower, and were absent (< 100) in Formaggio di Fossa.Table 3.\n", " \nCasera, Taleggio, Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses. Lactobacilli were \nalso detected using Rogosa agar in all cheese surfaces in a range of 104\u2013106 CFU/cm2. The counts obtained on  [CLS] Pseudomonas agar were high in Gorgonzola, Scimudin and Taleggio surfaces [CLS]  (108 CFU/cm2), while in Casera samples the Pseudomonas values were three log units lower, and were absent (< 100) in Formaggio di Fossa.Table 3.\n    ", " \nCasera, Taleggio, Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses. Lactobacilli were \nalso detected using Rogosa agar in all cheese surfaces in a range of 104\u2013106 CFU/cm2. The counts obtained on  [CLS] Pseudomonas agar were high in Gorgonzola, Scimudin and Taleggio [CLS]  surfaces (108 CFU/cm2), while in Casera samples the Pseudomonas values were three log units lower, and were absent (< 100) in Formaggio di Fossa.Table 3.\n   ", " \nCasera, Taleggio, Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses. Lactobacilli were \nalso detected using Rogosa agar in all cheese surfaces in a range of 104\u2013106 CFU/cm2. The counts obtained on  [CLS] Pseudomonas agar were high in Gorgonzola, Scimudin and Taleggio surfaces [CLS]  (108 CFU/cm2), while in Casera samples the Pseudomonas values were three log units lower, and were absent (< 100) in Formaggio di Fossa.Table 3.\n    ", " \nCasera, Taleggio, Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses. Lactobacilli were \nalso detected using Rogosa agar in all cheese surfaces in a range of 104\u2013106 CFU/cm2. The counts obtained on  [CLS] Pseudomonas agar were high in Gorgonzola, Scimudin [CLS]  and Taleggio surfaces (108 CFU/cm2), while in Casera samples the Pseudomonas values were three log units lower, and were absent (< 100) in Formaggio di Fossa.Table 3.\n ", " \nCasera, Taleggio, Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses. Lactobacilli were \nalso detected using Rogosa agar in all cheese surfaces in a range of 104\u2013106 CFU/cm2. The counts obtained on  [CLS] Pseudomonas agar were high in Gorgonzola, Scimudin and Taleggio surfaces [CLS]  (108 CFU/cm2), while in Casera samples the Pseudomonas values were three log units lower, and were absent (< 100) in Formaggio di Fossa.Table 3.\n    ", " agar in all cheese surfaces in a range of 104\u2013106 CFU/cm2. The counts obtained on Pseudomonas agar were high in Gorgonzola, Scimudin and Taleggio surfaces (108 CFU/cm2), while in  [CLS] Casera samples the Pseudomonas [CLS]  values were three log units lower, and were absent (< 100) in Formaggio di Fossa.Table 3.\n        Results of the enumeration of", " [CLS] Pseudomonas, and other Gram-negative bacteria such as Halomonas and members of the Enterobacteriaceae family may be very common on the cheese surface [CLS]  ( Chaves-Lopez et al., 2006, Deetae et al., 2009, Larpin, 2006, Morales et al., 2003, Mounier et al., 2005 and Rea et al., 2007).\n", " [CLS] Pseudomonas, and other Gram-negative bacteria such as Halomonas and members of the Enterobacteriaceae family may be very common on the cheese [CLS]  surface ( Chaves-Lopez et al., 2006, Deetae et al., 2009, Larpin, 2006, Morales et al., 2003, Mounier et al., 2005 and Rea et al., 2007).\n"]]
["bb_dev_173", [" DGGE gels, several Staphylococcus were identified, mainly S. saprophyticus, S. equorum, S. vitulinus and S. caprae species. E. faecalis, E. faecium, B. linens, Corynebacterium flavescens were also frequently isolated.  [CLS] M. luteus\n was only isolated from Scimudin cheese [CLS] .\n", " [CLS] Formaggio di Fossa, Gorgonzola and Taleggio \ncheeses share common features. Common DGGE bands originated by P. celer, P. aquimaris, P. glacincolaus, S. equorum, and M. luteus [CLS] \n were identified.\n", " [CLS] Gorgonzola and Taleggio \ncheeses share common features. Common DGGE bands originated by P. celer, P. aquimaris, P. glacincolaus, S. equorum, and M. luteus [CLS] \n were identified.\n", " [CLS] Taleggio \ncheeses share common features. Common DGGE bands originated by P. celer, P. aquimaris, P. glacincolaus, S. equorum, and M. luteus [CLS] \n were identified.\n", " [CLS] white mould rind, Scimudin cheese, revealed as major bands M. luteus [CLS]  and P. glacincolaus and the presence of S. vitulinus. DGGE analysis of Casera Valtellina, a cheese characterized by low water activity of the rind, showed a surface composed by", " [CLS] Scimudin cheese, revealed as major bands M. luteus [CLS]  and P. glacincolaus and the presence of S. vitulinus. DGGE analysis of Casera Valtellina, a cheese characterized by low water activity of the rind, showed a surface composed by"]]
["bb_dev_174", [" [CLS] S. saprophyticus strains analysed ( Fig. 2A),\n at a similarity level of 60%; (i) Cluster 1 (S of 65%) containing two \nstrains from Taleggio and Scimudin cheeses, (ii) Cluster 2 (S of 78%) \nonly contained strains from Gorgonzola cheese, (iii) Cluster 3 (S of \n65%) included ten strains, of which 4 were isolated from Taleggio and \nCasera cheeses [CLS] , and one each from Scimudin and Gorgonzola, and (iv) \nCluster 4 (S of 80%) including three strains, of which one was from \nTaleggio and two from Scimudin", " [CLS] S. saprophyticus strains analysed ( Fig. 2A),\n at a similarity level of 60%; (i) Cluster 1 (S of 65%) containing two \nstrains from Taleggio and Scimudin cheeses, (ii) Cluster 2 (S of 78%) \nonly contained strains from Gorgonzola cheese, (iii) Cluster 3 (S of \n65%) included ten strains, of which 4 were isolated from Taleggio and \nCasera cheeses, and one each from Scimudin [CLS]  and Gorgonzola, and (iv) \nCluster 4 (S of 80%) including three strains, of which one was from \nTaleggio and two from Scimudin cheeses. The cluster analysis of", " [CLS] S. saprophyticus strains analysed ( Fig. 2A),\n at a similarity level of 60%; (i) Cluster 1 (S of 65%) containing two \nstrains from Taleggio and Scimudin cheeses, (ii) Cluster 2 (S of 78%) \nonly contained strains from Gorgonzola cheese [CLS] , (iii) Cluster 3 (S of \n65%) included ten strains, of which 4 were isolated from Taleggio and \nCasera cheeses, and one each from Scimudin and Gorgonzola, and", " [CLS] S. saprophyticus strains analysed ( Fig. 2A),\n at a similarity level of 60%; (i) Cluster 1 (S of 65%) containing two \nstrains from Taleggio and Scimudin cheeses, (ii) Cluster 2 (S of 78%) \nonly contained strains from Gorgonzola cheese, (iii) Cluster 3 (S of \n65%) included ten strains, of which 4 were isolated from Taleggio and \nCasera cheeses, and one each from Scimudin and Gorgonzola, and (iv) \nCluster 4 (S of 80%) including three strains, of which one was from \nTaleggio and two from Scimudin cheeses [CLS] . The cluster analysis of 23S. equorum strains ( Fig. 2B)\n shows two main clusters (i) Cluster 1 (S of 84%) containing strains \nfrom Taleggio (4), Scimudin (6),", " [CLS] S. saprophyticus strains analysed ( Fig. 2A),\n at a similarity level of 60%; (i) Cluster 1 (S of 65%) containing two \nstrains from Taleggio and Scimudin cheeses [CLS] , (ii) Cluster 2 (S of 78%) \nonly contained strains from Gorgonzola cheese, (iii) Cluster 3 (S of \n65%) included ten strains, of which 4 were isolated from", " [CLS] S. saprophyticus strains analysed ( Fig. 2A),\n at a similarity level of 60%; (i) Cluster 1 (S of 65%) containing two \nstrains from Taleggio and Scimudin cheeses, (ii) Cluster 2 (S of 78%) \nonly contained strains from Gorgonzola cheese, (iii) Cluster 3 (S of \n65%) included ten strains, of which 4 were isolated from Taleggio and \nCasera cheeses [CLS] , and one each from Scimudin and Gorgonzola, and (iv) \nCluster 4 (S of 80%) including three strains, of which one was from \nTaleggio and two from Scimudin", " [CLS] S. saprophyticus strains analysed ( Fig. 2A),\n at a similarity level of 60%; (i) Cluster 1 (S of 65%) containing two \nstrains from Taleggio and Scimudin cheeses, (ii) Cluster 2 (S of 78%) \nonly contained strains from Gorgonzola cheese, (iii) Cluster 3 (S of \n65%) included ten strains, of which 4 were isolated from Taleggio and \nCasera cheeses, and one each from Scimudin and Gorgonzola [CLS] , and (iv) \nCluster 4 (S of 80%) including three strains, of which one was from \nTaleggio and two from Scimudin cheeses. The cluster analysis of 23S. equorum", " [CLS] S. saprophyticus strains analysed ( Fig. 2A),\n at a similarity level of 60%; (i) Cluster 1 (S of 65%) containing two \nstrains from Taleggio and Scimudin cheeses, (ii) Cluster 2 (S of 78%) \nonly contained strains from Gorgonzola cheese, (iii) Cluster 3 (S of \n65%) included ten strains, of which 4 were isolated from Taleggio and \nCasera cheeses, and one each from Scimudin and Gorgonzola, and (iv) \nCluster 4 (S of 80%) including three strains, of which one was from \nTaleggio [CLS]  and two from Scimudin cheeses. The cluster analysis of 23S. equorum strains ( Fig. 2B)\n shows two main clusters (i) Cluster 1 (S of 84%) containing strains ", " [CLS] S. saprophyticus strains analysed ( Fig. 2A),\n at a similarity level of 60%; (i) Cluster 1 (S of 65%) containing two \nstrains from Taleggio and Scimudin cheeses [CLS] , (ii) Cluster 2 (S of 78%) \nonly contained strains from Gorgonzola cheese, (iii) Cluster 3 (S of \n65%) included ten strains, of which 4 were isolated from"]]
["bb_dev_175", [" and Gorgonzola, and (iv) \nCluster 4 (S of 80%) including three strains, of which one was from \nTaleggio and two from Scimudin cheeses. The cluster analysis of 23 [CLS] S. equorum strains ( Fig. 2B)\n shows two main clusters (i) Cluster 1 (S of 84%) containing strains \nfrom Taleggio (4), Scimudin (6), Casera (5) and Gorgonzola (1) cheeses \nand (ii) Cluster 2 (S of 87%) including 4 strains from Gorgonzola [CLS] , 2 \nfrom Scimudin and only one from Taleggio.\n", " and Gorgonzola, and (iv) \nCluster 4 (S of 80%) including three strains, of which one was from \nTaleggio and two from Scimudin cheeses. The cluster analysis of 23 [CLS] S. equorum strains ( Fig. 2B)\n shows two main clusters (i) Cluster 1 (S of 84%) containing strains \nfrom Taleggio (4), Scimudin (6), Casera (5) and Gorgonzola (1) cheeses [CLS]  \nand (ii) Cluster 2 (S of 87%) including 4 strains from Gorgonzola, 2 \nfrom Scimudin and only one from Taleggio.\n", " and Gorgonzola, and (iv) \nCluster 4 (S of 80%) including three strains, of which one was from \nTaleggio and two from Scimudin cheeses. The cluster analysis of 23 [CLS] S. equorum strains ( Fig. 2B)\n shows two main clusters (i) Cluster 1 (S of 84%) containing strains \nfrom Taleggio (4), Scimudin (6), Casera (5) and Gorgonzola (1) cheeses [CLS]  \nand (ii) Cluster 2 (S of 87%) including 4 strains from Gorgonzola, 2 \nfrom Scimudin and only one from Taleggio.\n", " and Gorgonzola, and (iv) \nCluster 4 (S of 80%) including three strains, of which one was from \nTaleggio and two from Scimudin cheeses. The cluster analysis of 23 [CLS] S. equorum strains ( Fig. 2B)\n shows two main clusters (i) Cluster 1 (S of 84%) containing strains \nfrom Taleggio (4), Scimudin (6), Casera (5) and Gorgonzola (1) cheeses [CLS]  \nand (ii) Cluster 2 (S of 87%) including 4 strains from Gorgonzola, 2 \nfrom Scimudin and only one from Taleggio.\n", " and Gorgonzola, and (iv) \nCluster 4 (S of 80%) including three strains, of which one was from \nTaleggio and two from Scimudin cheeses. The cluster analysis of 23 [CLS] S. equorum strains ( Fig. 2B)\n shows two main clusters (i) Cluster 1 (S of 84%) containing strains \nfrom Taleggio (4), Scimudin (6), Casera (5) and Gorgonzola (1) cheeses \nand (ii) Cluster 2 (S of 87%) including 4 strains from Gorgonzola, 2 \nfrom Scimudin and only one from Taleggio [CLS] .\n", " and Gorgonzola, and (iv) \nCluster 4 (S of 80%) including three strains, of which one was from \nTaleggio and two from Scimudin cheeses. The cluster analysis of 23 [CLS] S. equorum strains ( Fig. 2B)\n shows two main clusters (i) Cluster 1 (S of 84%) containing strains \nfrom Taleggio (4), Scimudin (6), Casera (5) and Gorgonzola (1) cheeses \nand (ii) Cluster 2 (S of 87%) including 4 strains from Gorgonzola, 2 \nfrom Scimudin [CLS]  and only one from Taleggio.\n", " and Gorgonzola, and (iv) \nCluster 4 (S of 80%) including three strains, of which one was from \nTaleggio and two from Scimudin cheeses. The cluster analysis of 23 [CLS] S. equorum strains ( Fig. 2B)\n shows two main clusters (i) Cluster 1 (S of 84%) containing strains \nfrom Taleggio (4), Scimudin (6), Casera (5) and Gorgonzola (1) cheeses [CLS]  \nand (ii) Cluster 2 (S of 87%) including 4 strains from Gorgonzola, 2 \nfrom Scimudin and only one from Taleggio.\n", " [CLS] Formaggio di Fossa, Gorgonzola and Taleggio \ncheeses share common features. Common DGGE bands originated by P. celer, P. aquimaris, P. glacincolaus, S. equorum [CLS] , and M. luteus\n were identified.\n", " [CLS] Gorgonzola and Taleggio \ncheeses share common features. Common DGGE bands originated by P. celer, P. aquimaris, P. glacincolaus, S. equorum [CLS] , and M. luteus\n were identified.\n", " [CLS] Taleggio \ncheeses share common features. Common DGGE bands originated by P. celer, P. aquimaris, P. glacincolaus, S. equorum [CLS] , and M. luteus\n were identified.\n", " culture independent analysis of \nthe white mould rind, Scimudin cheese, revealed as major bands M. luteus and P. glacincolaus and the presence of S. vitulinus. DGGE analysis of  [CLS] Casera Valtellina, a cheese characterized by low water activity of the rind, showed a surface composed by S. equorum [CLS] , B. linens and B. casei\n as the main bacterial species.\n"]]
["bb_dev_176", [" [CLS] Formaggio di Fossa, Gorgonzola and Taleggio \ncheeses share common features. Common DGGE bands originated by P. celer [CLS] , P. aquimaris, P. glacincolaus, S. equorum, and M. luteus\n were identified.\n", " [CLS] Gorgonzola and Taleggio \ncheeses share common features. Common DGGE bands originated by P. celer [CLS] , P. aquimaris, P. glacincolaus, S. equorum, and M. luteus\n were identified.\n", " [CLS] Taleggio \ncheeses share common features. Common DGGE bands originated by P. celer [CLS] , P. aquimaris, P. glacincolaus, S. equorum, and M. luteus\n were identified.\n"]]
["bb_dev_177", [" [CLS] Formaggio di Fossa, Gorgonzola and Taleggio \ncheeses share common features. Common DGGE bands originated by P. celer, P. aquimaris [CLS] , P. glacincolaus, S. equorum, and M. luteus\n were identified.\n", " [CLS] Gorgonzola and Taleggio \ncheeses share common features. Common DGGE bands originated by P. celer, P. aquimaris [CLS] , P. glacincolaus, S. equorum, and M. luteus\n were identified.\n", " [CLS] Taleggio \ncheeses share common features. Common DGGE bands originated by P. celer, P. aquimaris [CLS] , P. glacincolaus, S. equorum, and M. luteus\n were identified.\n"]]
["bb_dev_178", [" [CLS] Gorgonzola and Taleggio \ncheeses share common features. Common DGGE bands originated by P. celer, P. aquimaris, P. glacincolaus [CLS] , S. equorum, and M. luteus\n were identified.\n", " [CLS] Taleggio \ncheeses share common features. Common DGGE bands originated by P. celer, P. aquimaris, P. glacincolaus [CLS] , S. equorum, and M. luteus\n were identified.\n", " [CLS] Formaggio di Fossa, Gorgonzola and Taleggio \ncheeses share common features. Common DGGE bands originated by P. celer, P. aquimaris, P. glacincolaus [CLS] , S. equorum, and M. luteus\n were identified.\n", " [CLS] Scimudin cheese, revealed as major bands M. luteus and P. glacincolaus [CLS]  and the presence of S. vitulinus. DGGE analysis of Casera Valtellina, a cheese characterized by low water activity of the rind, showed a surface composed by S. equorum, B.", " [CLS] white mould rind, Scimudin cheese, revealed as major bands M. luteus and P. glacincolaus [CLS]  and the presence of S. vitulinus. DGGE analysis of Casera Valtellina, a cheese characterized by low water activity of the rind, showed a surface composed by S. equorum, B."]]
["bb_dev_179", [" culture independent analysis of \nthe white mould rind, Scimudin cheese, revealed as major bands M. luteus and P. glacincolaus and the presence of S. vitulinus. DGGE analysis of  [CLS] Casera Valtellina, a cheese characterized by low water activity of the rind, showed a surface composed by S. equorum, B. linens and B. casei [CLS] \n as the main bacterial species.\n"]]
["bb_dev_180", [" [CLS] C. casei and C. variabilis were those more commonly isolated from the cheese rinds [CLS]  ( Brennan et al., 2002, Mounier et al., 2005 and Rea et al., 2007). C. flavescens was only found on the rind of Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses. This species", " [CLS] C. casei and C. variabilis were those more commonly isolated from the cheese [CLS]  rinds ( Brennan et al., 2002, Mounier et al., 2005 and Rea et al., 2007). C. flavescens was only found on the rind of Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses. This", " also isolated by  Brennan et al. (2002) on the surface of Gobbeen cheese, though only once during the ripening. C. flavescens produced a yellow pigment and together with  [CLS] C. casei, C. variabile, and C. ammoniagenes are considered dairy [CLS]  species ( Denis and Irlinger, 2008).\n"]]
["bb_dev_181", [" [CLS] C. variabilis were those more commonly isolated from the cheese rinds [CLS]  ( Brennan et al., 2002, Mounier et al., 2005 and Rea et al., 2007). C. flavescens was only found on the rind of Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses. This species", " [CLS] C. variabilis were those more commonly isolated from the cheese [CLS]  rinds ( Brennan et al., 2002, Mounier et al., 2005 and Rea et al., 2007). C. flavescens was only found on the rind of Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses. This"]]
["bb_dev_182", [" species, C. casei and C. variabilis were those more commonly isolated from the cheese rinds ( Brennan et al., 2002, Mounier et al., 2005 and Rea et al., 2007).  [CLS] C. flavescens was only found on the rind of Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses [CLS] . This species was also isolated by  Brennan et al. (2002) on the surface of Gobbeen cheese, though only once during the ripening. C. flavescens produced a yellow pigment", " species, C. casei and C. variabilis were those more commonly isolated from the cheese rinds ( Brennan et al., 2002, Mounier et al., 2005 and Rea et al., 2007).  [CLS] C. flavescens was only found on the rind of Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses [CLS] . This species was also isolated by  Brennan et al. (2002) on the surface of Gobbeen cheese, though only once during the ripening. C. flavescens produced a yellow pigment", " species, C. casei and C. variabilis were those more commonly isolated from the cheese rinds ( Brennan et al., 2002, Mounier et al., 2005 and Rea et al., 2007).  [CLS] C. flavescens was only found on the rind of Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses [CLS] . This species was also isolated by  Brennan et al. (2002) on the surface of Gobbeen cheese, though only once during the ripening. C. flavescens produced a yellow pigment", " species, C. casei and C. variabilis were those more commonly isolated from the cheese rinds ( Brennan et al., 2002, Mounier et al., 2005 and Rea et al., 2007).  [CLS] C. flavescens was only found on the rind of Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses. This species was also isolated by  Brennan et al. (2002) on the surface of Gobbeen cheese [CLS] , though only once during the ripening. C. flavescens produced a yellow pigment and together with C. casei, C. variabile, and C. ammoniagenes are considered dairy species ( Denis and", " species, C. casei and C. variabilis were those more commonly isolated from the cheese rinds ( Brennan et al., 2002, Mounier et al., 2005 and Rea et al., 2007).  [CLS] C. flavescens was only found on the rind of Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses. This species was also isolated by  Brennan et al. (2002) on the surface of Gobbeen cheese [CLS] , though only once during the ripening. C. flavescens produced a yellow pigment and together with C. casei, C. variabile, and C. ammoniagenes are considered dairy species ( Denis and", " species, C. casei and C. variabilis were those more commonly isolated from the cheese rinds ( Brennan et al., 2002, Mounier et al., 2005 and Rea et al., 2007).  [CLS] C. flavescens was only found on the rind of Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses [CLS] . This species was also isolated by  Brennan et al. (2002) on the surface of Gobbeen cheese, though only once during the ripening. C. flavescens produced a yellow pigment", " rind of Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses. This species was also isolated by  Brennan et al. (2002) on the surface of Gobbeen cheese, though only once during the ripening.  [CLS] C. flavescens produced a yellow pigment and together with C. casei, C. variabile, and C. ammoniagenes are considered dairy [CLS]  species ( Denis and Irlinger, 2008).\n"]]
["bb_dev_183", [" rind of Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses. This species was also isolated by  Brennan et al. (2002) on the surface of Gobbeen cheese, though only once during the ripening.  [CLS] C. flavescens produced a yellow pigment [CLS]  and together with C. casei, C. variabile, and C. ammoniagenes are considered dairy species ( Denis and Irlinger, 2008).\n"]]
["bb_dev_184", [" by  Brennan et al. (2002) on the surface of Gobbeen cheese, though only once during the ripening. C. flavescens produced a yellow pigment and together with C. casei,  [CLS] C. variabile, and C. ammoniagenes are considered dairy [CLS]  species ( Denis and Irlinger, 2008).\n"]]
["bb_dev_185", [" et al. (2002) on the surface of Gobbeen cheese, though only once during the ripening. C. flavescens produced a yellow pigment and together with C. casei, C. variabile, and  [CLS] C. ammoniagenes are considered dairy [CLS]  species ( Denis and Irlinger, 2008).\n"]]
["bb_dev_186", [" surface.  Dolci et al. (2009) detected Lactobacillus counts of 105\u2013107 CFU/cm2 on Fontina cheese surface after 90 days of ripening and Cocolin et al. (2009)\n reported that  [CLS] lactococci and lactobacilli, dominated the microbial \necology of Gorgonzola [CLS]  rind. Our results showed that the species L. curvatus for example was only isolated from Taleggio rind and L. brevis\n was isolated from the surface of Gorgonzola and", " surface.  Dolci et al. (2009) detected Lactobacillus counts of 105\u2013107 CFU/cm2 on Fontina cheese surface after 90 days of ripening and Cocolin et al. (2009)\n reported that  [CLS] lactococci and lactobacilli, dominated the microbial \necology of Gorgonzola rind [CLS] . Our results showed that the species L. curvatus for example was only isolated from Taleggio rind and L. brevis\n was isolated from the surface of Gorgonzola and Scimudin"]]
["bb_dev_187", [" Dolci et al. (2009) detected Lactobacillus counts of 105\u2013107 CFU/cm2 on Fontina cheese surface after 90 days of ripening and Cocolin et al. (2009)\n reported that lactococci and  [CLS] lactobacilli, dominated the microbial \necology of Gorgonzola rind [CLS] . Our results showed that the species L. curvatus for example was only isolated from Taleggio rind and L. brevis\n was isolated from the surface of Gorgonzola and Scimudin", " Dolci et al. (2009) detected Lactobacillus counts of 105\u2013107 CFU/cm2 on Fontina cheese surface after 90 days of ripening and Cocolin et al. (2009)\n reported that lactococci and  [CLS] lactobacilli, dominated the microbial \necology of Gorgonzola [CLS]  rind. Our results showed that the species L. curvatus for example was only isolated from Taleggio rind and L. brevis\n was isolated from the surface of Gorgonzola and"]]
["bb_dev_188", [" 90 days of ripening and Cocolin et al. (2009)\n reported that lactococci and lactobacilli, dominated the microbial \necology of Gorgonzola rind. Our results showed that the species  [CLS] L. curvatus for example was only isolated from Taleggio [CLS]  rind and L. brevis\n was isolated from the surface of Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses. In \nparticular most of the surface isolates from Formaggio di Fossa cheese ", " 90 days of ripening and Cocolin et al. (2009)\n reported that lactococci and lactobacilli, dominated the microbial \necology of Gorgonzola rind. Our results showed that the species  [CLS] L. curvatus for example was only isolated from Taleggio rind [CLS]  and L. brevis\n was isolated from the surface of Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses. In \nparticular most of the surface isolates from Formaggio di Fossa cheese \nwere"]]
["bb_dev_189", [" that lactococci and lactobacilli, dominated the microbial \necology of Gorgonzola rind. Our results showed that the species L. curvatus for example was only isolated from Taleggio rind and  [CLS] L. brevis\n was isolated from the surface of Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses [CLS] . In \nparticular most of the surface isolates from Formaggio di Fossa cheese \nwere identified as L. acidipiscis, a Gram positive rod, \nmicroaerophilic, able to grow in", " that lactococci and lactobacilli, dominated the microbial \necology of Gorgonzola rind. Our results showed that the species L. curvatus for example was only isolated from Taleggio rind and  [CLS] L. brevis\n was isolated from the surface of Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses [CLS] . In \nparticular most of the surface isolates from Formaggio di Fossa cheese \nwere identified as L. acidipiscis, a Gram positive rod, \nmicroaerophilic, able to grow in", " that lactococci and lactobacilli, dominated the microbial \necology of Gorgonzola rind. Our results showed that the species L. curvatus for example was only isolated from Taleggio rind and  [CLS] L. brevis\n was isolated from the surface of Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses [CLS] . In \nparticular most of the surface isolates from Formaggio di Fossa cheese \nwere identified as L. acidipiscis, a Gram positive rod, \nmicroaerophilic, able to grow in", " that lactococci and lactobacilli, dominated the microbial \necology of Gorgonzola rind. Our results showed that the species L. curvatus for example was only isolated from Taleggio rind and  [CLS] L. brevis\n was isolated from the surface of Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses [CLS] . In \nparticular most of the surface isolates from Formaggio di Fossa cheese \nwere identified as L. acidipiscis, a Gram positive rod, \nmicroaerophilic, able to grow in"]]
["bb_dev_190", [" brevis\n was isolated from the surface of Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses. In \nparticular most of the surface isolates from Formaggio di Fossa cheese \nwere identified as  [CLS] L. acidipiscis, a Gram positive rod, \nmicroaerophilic, able to grow in 10\u201312% (w/v) NaCl. This species \noriginally isolated from fermented fish [CLS] , and characterized by  Tanasupawat et al. (2000), was recently reported to be present in Greek cheese (Asteri et al., 2009). Enteroccocci were present in larger numbers on Scimudin", " was only isolated from Taleggio rind and L. brevis\n was isolated from the surface of Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses. In \nparticular most of the surface isolates from  [CLS] Formaggio di Fossa cheese \nwere identified as L. acidipiscis [CLS] , a Gram positive rod, \nmicroaerophilic, able to grow in 10\u201312% (w/v) NaCl. This species \noriginally isolated from fermented fish, and characterized by  Tanasupawat et al. (2000),", " brevis\n was isolated from the surface of Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses. In \nparticular most of the surface isolates from Formaggio di Fossa cheese \nwere identified as  [CLS] L. acidipiscis, a Gram positive rod, \nmicroaerophilic, able to grow in 10\u201312% (w/v) NaCl. This species \noriginally isolated from fermented fish, and characterized by  Tanasupawat et al. (2000), was recently reported to be present in Greek cheese [CLS]  (Asteri et al., 2009). Enteroccocci were present in larger numbers on Scimudin (107 CFU/cm2) and Gorgonzola (105 CFU/cm2) surfaces than on Fontina rind (104 CFU/cm2) as reported by Dolci"]]
["bb_dev_191", [" brevis\n was isolated from the surface of Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses. In \nparticular most of the surface isolates from Formaggio di Fossa cheese \nwere identified as  [CLS] L. acidipiscis, a Gram positive rod [CLS] , \nmicroaerophilic, able to grow in 10\u201312% (w/v) NaCl. This species \noriginally isolated from fermented fish, and characterized by  Tanasupawat et al. (2000), was recently reported to", " brevis\n was isolated from the surface of Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses. In \nparticular most of the surface isolates from Formaggio di Fossa cheese \nwere identified as  [CLS] L. acidipiscis, a Gram positive [CLS]  rod, \nmicroaerophilic, able to grow in 10\u201312% (w/v) NaCl. This species \noriginally isolated from fermented fish, and characterized by  Tanasupawat et al. (2000), was recently reported", " brevis\n was isolated from the surface of Gorgonzola and Scimudin cheeses. In \nparticular most of the surface isolates from Formaggio di Fossa cheese \nwere identified as  [CLS] L. acidipiscis, a Gram positive rod, \nmicroaerophilic [CLS] , able to grow in 10\u201312% (w/v) NaCl. This species \noriginally isolated from fermented fish, and characterized by  Tanasupawat et al. (2000), was recently reported to be present"]]
["bb_dev_192", [" This species \noriginally isolated from fermented fish, and characterized by  Tanasupawat et al. (2000), was recently reported to be present in Greek cheese (Asteri et al., 2009).  [CLS] Enteroccocci were present in larger numbers on Scimudin (107 CFU/cm2) and Gorgonzola (105 CFU/cm2) surfaces than on Fontina [CLS]  rind (104 CFU/cm2) as reported by Dolci et al. (2009) while Cocolin et al. (2009) obtained diverse enterococci counts, with variation between 103\u2013108 CFU/g\n within the 18 samples", " This species \noriginally isolated from fermented fish, and characterized by  Tanasupawat et al. (2000), was recently reported to be present in Greek cheese (Asteri et al., 2009).  [CLS] Enteroccocci were present in larger numbers on Scimudin (107 CFU/cm2) and Gorgonzola (105 CFU/cm2) surfaces [CLS]  than on Fontina rind (104 CFU/cm2) as reported by Dolci et al. (2009) while Cocolin et al. (2009) obtained diverse enterococci counts, with variation between 103\u2013108 CFU/g\n within", " This species \noriginally isolated from fermented fish, and characterized by  Tanasupawat et al. (2000), was recently reported to be present in Greek cheese (Asteri et al., 2009).  [CLS] Enteroccocci were present in larger numbers on Scimudin (107 CFU/cm2) and Gorgonzola (105 CFU/cm2) surfaces [CLS]  than on Fontina rind (104 CFU/cm2) as reported by Dolci et al. (2009) while Cocolin et al. (2009) obtained diverse enterococci counts, with variation between 103\u2013108 CFU/g\n within", " This species \noriginally isolated from fermented fish, and characterized by  Tanasupawat et al. (2000), was recently reported to be present in Greek cheese (Asteri et al., 2009).  [CLS] Enteroccocci were present in larger numbers on Scimudin [CLS]  (107 CFU/cm2) and Gorgonzola (105 CFU/cm2) surfaces than on Fontina rind (104 CFU/cm2) as reported by Dolci et al. (2009) while Cocolin et al. (2009) obtained diverse enterococci counts,", " This species \noriginally isolated from fermented fish, and characterized by  Tanasupawat et al. (2000), was recently reported to be present in Greek cheese (Asteri et al., 2009).  [CLS] Enteroccocci were present in larger numbers on Scimudin (107 CFU/cm2) and Gorgonzola (105 CFU/cm2) surfaces than on Fontina rind [CLS]  (104 CFU/cm2) as reported by Dolci et al. (2009) while Cocolin et al. (2009) obtained diverse enterococci counts, with variation between 103\u2013108 CFU/g\n within the 18 samples of", " This species \noriginally isolated from fermented fish, and characterized by  Tanasupawat et al. (2000), was recently reported to be present in Greek cheese (Asteri et al., 2009).  [CLS] Enteroccocci were present in larger numbers on Scimudin (107 CFU/cm2) and Gorgonzola [CLS]  (105 CFU/cm2) surfaces than on Fontina rind (104 CFU/cm2) as reported by Dolci et al. (2009) while Cocolin et al. (2009) obtained diverse enterococci counts, with variation between 103\u2013108"]]
["bb_dev_193", [" [CLS] Gram negative bacteria including Microbacterium foliorum [CLS] , Psychrobacter sp. and Proteus vulgaris,\n showed a strong potential for producing aroma compounds with pronounced\n \u201ccheese\u201d notes such as volatile sulphur compounds.\n"]]
["bb_dev_194", [" [CLS] Gram negative bacteria including Microbacterium foliorum, Psychrobacter sp. [CLS]  and Proteus vulgaris,\n showed a strong potential for producing aroma compounds with pronounced\n \u201ccheese\u201d notes such as volatile sulphur compounds.\n"]]
["bb_dev_195", [" [CLS] Gram negative bacteria including Microbacterium foliorum, Psychrobacter sp. and Proteus vulgaris [CLS] ,\n showed a strong potential for producing aroma compounds with pronounced\n \u201ccheese\u201d notes such as volatile sulphur compounds.\n"]]
["bb_dev_196", [" [CLS] Pseudomonas, and other Gram-negative [CLS]  bacteria such as Halomonas and members of the Enterobacteriaceae family may be very common on the cheese surface ( Chaves-Lopez et al., 2006, Deetae et al., 2009, Larpin, 2006,"]]
["bb_dev_197", [" [CLS] Halomonas and members of the Enterobacteriaceae family may be very common on the cheese surface [CLS]  ( Chaves-Lopez et al., 2006, Deetae et al., 2009, Larpin, 2006, Morales et al., 2003, Mounier et al., 2005 and Rea et al., 2007).\n", " [CLS] Halomonas and members of the Enterobacteriaceae family may be very common on the cheese [CLS]  surface ( Chaves-Lopez et al., 2006, Deetae et al., 2009, Larpin, 2006, Morales et al., 2003, Mounier et al., 2005 and Rea et al., 2007).\n", " For \nexample, we identified two bacterial genera, Yaniella and Nocardiopsis, that have never been reported in food microbial ecosystems. We also find that halotolerant \u03b3-Proteobacteria such as Vibrio,  [CLS] Halomonas, and Pseudoalteromonas that are typically associated with marine environments [CLS]  ( Holmstr\u00f6m and Kjelleberg, 1999 and Reen et al., 2006) are widespread in cheese communities (Figure 2).\n", " For \nexample, we identified two bacterial genera, Yaniella and Nocardiopsis, that have never been reported in food microbial ecosystems. We also find that halotolerant \u03b3-Proteobacteria such as Vibrio,  [CLS] Halomonas, and Pseudoalteromonas that are typically associated with marine environments ( Holmstr\u00f6m and Kjelleberg, 1999 and Reen et al., 2006) are widespread in cheese [CLS]  communities (Figure 2).\n"]]
["bb_dev_198", [" [CLS] Gram-negative bacteria such as Halomonas [CLS]  and members of the Enterobacteriaceae family may be very common on the cheese surface ( Chaves-Lopez et al., 2006, Deetae et al., 2009, Larpin, 2006, Morales et al., 2003,", " of cheese is largely unexplored. For \nexample, we identified two bacterial genera, Yaniella and Nocardiopsis, that have never been reported in food microbial ecosystems. We also find that  [CLS] halotolerant \u03b3-Proteobacteria such as Vibrio, Halomonas [CLS] , and Pseudoalteromonas that are typically associated with marine environments ( Holmstr\u00f6m and Kjelleberg, 1999 and Reen et al., 2006) are widespread in cheese communities (Figure 2).\n"]]
["bb_dev_199", [" [CLS] S. thermophilus and L. delbrueckii,\n bacteria involved in the primary stage of cheese [CLS]  fermentation, but not \nfound among the analysed isolates.\n"]]
["bb_dev_200", [" [CLS] L. delbrueckii,\n bacteria involved in the primary stage of cheese [CLS]  fermentation, but not \nfound among the analysed isolates.\n"]]
["bb_dev_201", [" of cheese is largely unexplored. For \nexample, we identified two bacterial genera, Yaniella and Nocardiopsis, that have never been reported in food microbial ecosystems. We also find that  [CLS] halotolerant \u03b3-Proteobacteria [CLS]  such as Vibrio, Halomonas, and Pseudoalteromonas that are typically associated with marine environments ( Holmstr\u00f6m and Kjelleberg, 1999 and Reen et al., 2006) are widespread in cheese communities (Figure"]]
["bb_dev_202", [" unexplored. For \nexample, we identified two bacterial genera, Yaniella and Nocardiopsis, that have never been reported in food microbial ecosystems. We also find that halotolerant \u03b3-Proteobacteria such as  [CLS] Vibrio, Halomonas, and Pseudoalteromonas that are typically associated with marine environments [CLS]  ( Holmstr\u00f6m and Kjelleberg, 1999 and Reen et al., 2006) are widespread in cheese communities (Figure 2).\n", " unexplored. For \nexample, we identified two bacterial genera, Yaniella and Nocardiopsis, that have never been reported in food microbial ecosystems. We also find that halotolerant \u03b3-Proteobacteria such as  [CLS] Vibrio, Halomonas, and Pseudoalteromonas that are typically associated with marine environments ( Holmstr\u00f6m and Kjelleberg, 1999 and Reen et al., 2006) are widespread in cheese [CLS]  communities (Figure 2).\n"]]
["bb_dev_203", [" of cheese is largely unexplored. For \nexample, we identified two bacterial genera, Yaniella and Nocardiopsis, that have never been reported in food microbial ecosystems. We also find that  [CLS] halotolerant \u03b3-Proteobacteria such as Vibrio [CLS] , Halomonas, and Pseudoalteromonas that are typically associated with marine environments ( Holmstr\u00f6m and Kjelleberg, 1999 and Reen et al., 2006) are widespread in cheese communities (Figure 2).\n"]]
["bb_dev_204", ["\nexample, we identified two bacterial genera, Yaniella and Nocardiopsis, that have never been reported in food microbial ecosystems. We also find that halotolerant \u03b3-Proteobacteria such as Vibrio, Halomonas, and  [CLS] Pseudoalteromonas that are typically associated with marine environments ( Holmstr\u00f6m and Kjelleberg, 1999 and Reen et al., 2006) are widespread in cheese [CLS]  communities (Figure 2).\n", "\nexample, we identified two bacterial genera, Yaniella and Nocardiopsis, that have never been reported in food microbial ecosystems. We also find that halotolerant \u03b3-Proteobacteria such as Vibrio, Halomonas, and  [CLS] Pseudoalteromonas that are typically associated with marine environments [CLS]  ( Holmstr\u00f6m and Kjelleberg, 1999 and Reen et al., 2006) are widespread in cheese communities (Figure 2).\n", " Europe and North America ( Table S4B). Several of these previously undescribed mgl sequences belonged to Pseudoalteromonas spp. ( Figures 4C and S4B). We mapped metagenomic reads from three  [CLS] cheeses in which Pseudoalteromonas [CLS]  was abundant to the reference genome of Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis (99.5% pairwise identity,  Table S4C). Additionally, Pseudoalteromonas is known to have many cold-adapted enzymes that function in the polar", " 4C and S4B). We mapped metagenomic reads from three cheeses in which Pseudoalteromonas was abundant to the reference genome of Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis (99.5% pairwise identity,  Table S4C). Additionally,  [CLS] Pseudoalteromonas is known to have many cold-adapted enzymes that function in the polar seawater [CLS]  where this bacterium typically grows ( M\u00e9digue et al., 2005).\n", " al., 2010) (Table S4C),\n which could contribute to lipolysis and proteolysis and subsequent \nflavor formation in cheeses. Collectively, these metagenomic insights \ninto the potential function of  [CLS] Pseudoalteromonas suggest that this and other uninoculated yet abundant microbes could play key roles in cheese rind [CLS]  microbial communities.\n", " al., 2010) (Table S4C),\n which could contribute to lipolysis and proteolysis and subsequent \nflavor formation in cheeses. Collectively, these metagenomic insights \ninto the potential function of  [CLS] Pseudoalteromonas suggest that this and other uninoculated yet abundant microbes could play key roles in cheese [CLS]  rind microbial communities.\n"]]
["bb_dev_205", [" of cheese is largely unexplored. For \nexample, we identified two bacterial genera, Yaniella and Nocardiopsis, that have never been reported in food microbial ecosystems. We also find that  [CLS] halotolerant \u03b3-Proteobacteria such as Vibrio, Halomonas, and Pseudoalteromonas [CLS]  that are typically associated with marine environments ( Holmstr\u00f6m and Kjelleberg, 1999 and Reen et al., 2006) are widespread in cheese communities (Figure 2).\n", " 4C and S4B). We mapped metagenomic reads from three cheeses in which Pseudoalteromonas was abundant to the reference genome of Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis (99.5% pairwise identity,  Table S4C). Additionally,  [CLS] Pseudoalteromonas is known to have many cold-adapted [CLS]  enzymes that function in the polar seawater where this bacterium typically grows ( M\u00e9digue et al., 2005).\n"]]
["bb_dev_206", [" [CLS] Galactomyces and four genera of Proteobacteria, both found in high abundance on moist bloomy rinds [CLS]  ( Figure S2C), are positively correlated with moisture (Figure 3D), whereas several other fungal and bacterial taxa (Scopulariopsis, Aspergillus, Actinobacteria, and Staphylococcus), which are abundant on dry natural rinds"]]
["bb_dev_207", [" [CLS] Proteobacteria, both found in high abundance on moist bloomy rinds [CLS]  ( Figure S2C), are positively correlated with moisture (Figure 3D), whereas several other fungal and bacterial taxa (Scopulariopsis, Aspergillus, Actinobacteria, and Staphylococcus), which are abundant on dry natural rinds", " over a\n 63-day aging period demonstrates that patterns of succession are highly\n reproducible (Figures 7A and 7B). At the first time point, the community consisted primarily of  [CLS] Proteobacteria, the bacterium Leuconostoc, and the yeast Candida, which can be found at low levels in raw milk [CLS]  ( Quigley et al., 2013). Whereas Candida persisted in the fungal portion of the community, the Proteobacteria were succeeded by Staphylococcus within the first 7 days. As the rinds", " [CLS] cheese over a\n 63-day aging period demonstrates that patterns of succession are highly\n reproducible (Figures 7A and 7B). At the first time point, the community consisted primarily of Proteobacteria [CLS] , the bacterium Leuconostoc, and the yeast Candida, which can be found at low levels in raw milk ( Quigley et al., 2013). Whereas Candida persisted in the fungal portion", " three batches of cheese over a\n 63-day aging period demonstrates that patterns of succession are highly\n reproducible (Figures 7A and 7B). At the first time point, the  [CLS] community consisted primarily of Proteobacteria [CLS] , the bacterium Leuconostoc, and the yeast Candida, which can be found at low levels in raw milk ( Quigley et al., 2013). Whereas Candida persisted in the fungal portion"]]
["bb_dev_208", [" genera of Proteobacteria, both found in high abundance on moist bloomy rinds ( Figure S2C), are positively correlated with moisture (Figure 3D), whereas several other fungal and bacterial taxa ( [CLS] Scopulariopsis, Aspergillus, Actinobacteria, and Staphylococcus), which are abundant on dry natural rinds [CLS]  ( Figure S2C), are negatively associated with moisture (Figure 3D).\n", " portion of the community, the Proteobacteria were succeeded by Staphylococcus within the first 7 days. As the rinds matured, bacterial taxa Brevibacterium and Brachybacterium and fungal taxa Penicillium and  [CLS] Scopulariopsis\n emerged consistently as a significant fraction of the community [CLS]  (on \naverage, >1% in mature cheeses). Principal coordinate analysis shows a\n reproducible trajectory of all three communities over time ( Figure 7B),\n with the most rapid", " milk ( Quigley et al., 2013). Whereas Candida persisted in the fungal portion of the community, the Proteobacteria were succeeded by Staphylococcus within the first 7 days. As the  [CLS] rinds matured, bacterial taxa Brevibacterium and Brachybacterium and fungal taxa Penicillium and Scopulariopsis [CLS] \n emerged consistently as a significant fraction of the community (on \naverage, >1% in mature cheeses). Principal coordinate analysis shows a\n reproducible trajectory of all three communities", " portion of the community, the Proteobacteria were succeeded by Staphylococcus within the first 7 days. As the rinds matured, bacterial taxa Brevibacterium and Brachybacterium and fungal taxa Penicillium and  [CLS] Scopulariopsis\n emerged consistently as a significant fraction of the community (on \naverage, >1% in mature cheeses [CLS] ). Principal coordinate analysis shows a\n reproducible trajectory of all three communities over time ( Figure 7B),\n with the most rapid changes in composition occurring at early time"]]
["bb_dev_209", [" of Proteobacteria, both found in high abundance on moist bloomy rinds ( Figure S2C), are positively correlated with moisture (Figure 3D), whereas several other fungal and bacterial taxa (Scopulariopsis,  [CLS] Aspergillus, Actinobacteria, and Staphylococcus), which are abundant on dry natural rinds [CLS]  ( Figure S2C), are negatively associated with moisture (Figure 3D).\n"]]
["bb_dev_210", [" Proteobacteria, both found in high abundance on moist bloomy rinds ( Figure S2C), are positively correlated with moisture (Figure 3D), whereas several other fungal and bacterial taxa (Scopulariopsis, Aspergillus,  [CLS] Actinobacteria, and Staphylococcus), which are abundant on dry natural rinds [CLS]  ( Figure S2C), are negatively associated with moisture (Figure 3D).\n"]]
["bb_dev_211", [" [CLS] marine bacterium Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis [CLS]  were recovered from three cheese metagenomes (highlighted in gray box).\n", " [CLS] Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis were recovered from three cheese [CLS]  metagenomes (highlighted in gray box).\n", " Europe and North America ( Table S4B). Several of these previously undescribed mgl sequences belonged to Pseudoalteromonas spp. ( Figures 4C and S4B). We mapped metagenomic reads from three  [CLS] cheeses in which Pseudoalteromonas was abundant to the reference genome of Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis [CLS]  (99.5% pairwise identity,  Table S4C). Additionally, Pseudoalteromonas is known to have many cold-adapted enzymes that function in the polar seawater where this bacterium typically grows ( M\u00e9digue et"]]
["bb_dev_212", [" [CLS] cheese-associated mgl gene has only been identified in Brevibacterium linens [CLS]  ( Amarita et al., 2004, Monnet et al., 2010 and Schr\u00f6der et al., 2011). Our metagenomic sequencing uncovered previously undescribed mgl sequences with high sequence similarity to various \u03b3-Proteobacteria"]]
["bb_dev_213", [" linens ( Amarita et al., 2004, Monnet et al., 2010 and Schr\u00f6der et al., 2011). Our metagenomic sequencing uncovered previously undescribed mgl sequences with high sequence similarity to various  [CLS] \u03b3-Proteobacteria in cheeses [CLS]  from both Europe and North America ( Table S4B). Several of these previously undescribed mgl sequences belonged to Pseudoalteromonas spp. ( Figures 4C and S4B). We mapped metagenomic reads"]]
["bb_dev_214", [" linens ( Amarita et al., 2004, Monnet et al., 2010 and Schr\u00f6der et al., 2011). Our metagenomic sequencing uncovered previously undescribed mgl sequences with high sequence similarity to various  [CLS] \u03b3-Proteobacteria in cheeses from both Europe and North America [CLS]  ( Table S4B). Several of these previously undescribed mgl sequences belonged to Pseudoalteromonas spp. ( Figures 4C and S4B). We mapped metagenomic reads from three cheeses in which Pseudoalteromonas", " linens ( Amarita et al., 2004, Monnet et al., 2010 and Schr\u00f6der et al., 2011). Our metagenomic sequencing uncovered previously undescribed mgl sequences with high sequence similarity to various  [CLS] \u03b3-Proteobacteria in cheeses from both Europe [CLS]  and North America ( Table S4B). Several of these previously undescribed mgl sequences belonged to Pseudoalteromonas spp. ( Figures 4C and S4B). We mapped metagenomic reads from three cheeses"]]
["bb_dev_215", [" et al., 2010 and Schr\u00f6der et al., 2011). Our metagenomic sequencing uncovered previously undescribed mgl sequences with high sequence similarity to various \u03b3-Proteobacteria in cheeses from both Europe and  [CLS] North America ( Table S4B). Several of these previously undescribed mgl sequences belonged to Pseudoalteromonas spp. [CLS]  ( Figures 4C and S4B). We mapped metagenomic reads from three cheeses in which Pseudoalteromonas was abundant to the reference genome of Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis (99.5% pairwise identity,  Table", " 2004, Monnet et al., 2010 and Schr\u00f6der et al., 2011). Our metagenomic sequencing uncovered previously undescribed mgl sequences with high sequence similarity to various \u03b3-Proteobacteria in cheeses from both  [CLS] Europe and North America ( Table S4B). Several of these previously undescribed mgl sequences belonged to Pseudoalteromonas spp. [CLS]  ( Figures 4C and S4B). We mapped metagenomic reads from three cheeses in which Pseudoalteromonas was abundant to the reference genome of Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis (99.5% pairwise identity,  Table"]]
["bb_dev_216", [" Amarita et al., 2004, Monnet et al., 2010 and Schr\u00f6der et al., 2011). Our metagenomic sequencing uncovered previously undescribed mgl sequences with high sequence similarity to various \u03b3-Proteobacteria in  [CLS] cheeses from both Europe and North America ( Table S4B). Several of these previously undescribed mgl sequences belonged to Pseudoalteromonas spp. [CLS]  ( Figures 4C and S4B). We mapped metagenomic reads from three cheeses in which Pseudoalteromonas was abundant to the reference genome of Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis (99.5% pairwise identity,  Table"]]
["bb_dev_217", [" [CLS] cheese over a\n 63-day aging period demonstrates that patterns of succession are highly\n reproducible (Figures 7A and 7B). At the first time point, the community consisted primarily of Proteobacteria, the bacterium Leuconostoc [CLS] , and the yeast Candida, which can be found at low levels in raw milk ( Quigley et al., 2013). Whereas Candida persisted in the fungal portion of the community,", " 63-day aging period demonstrates that patterns of succession are highly\n reproducible (Figures 7A and 7B). At the first time point, the community consisted primarily of Proteobacteria, the bacterium  [CLS] Leuconostoc, and the yeast Candida, which can be found at low levels in raw milk [CLS]  ( Quigley et al., 2013). Whereas Candida persisted in the fungal portion of the community, the Proteobacteria were succeeded by Staphylococcus within the first 7 days. As the rinds", " three batches of cheese over a\n 63-day aging period demonstrates that patterns of succession are highly\n reproducible (Figures 7A and 7B). At the first time point, the  [CLS] community consisted primarily of Proteobacteria, the bacterium Leuconostoc [CLS] , and the yeast Candida, which can be found at low levels in raw milk ( Quigley et al., 2013). Whereas Candida persisted in the fungal portion of the community,"]]
["bb_dev_218", [" [CLS] cheese over a\n 63-day aging period demonstrates that patterns of succession are highly\n reproducible (Figures 7A and 7B). At the first time point, the community consisted primarily of Proteobacteria, the bacterium Leuconostoc, and the yeast Candida [CLS] , which can be found at low levels in raw milk ( Quigley et al., 2013). Whereas Candida persisted in the fungal portion of the community, the Proteobacteria were succeeded", " three batches of cheese over a\n 63-day aging period demonstrates that patterns of succession are highly\n reproducible (Figures 7A and 7B). At the first time point, the  [CLS] community consisted primarily of Proteobacteria, the bacterium Leuconostoc, and the yeast Candida [CLS] , which can be found at low levels in raw milk ( Quigley et al., 2013). Whereas Candida persisted in the fungal portion of the community, the Proteobacteria were succeeded", " that patterns of succession are highly\n reproducible (Figures 7A and 7B). At the first time point, the community consisted primarily of Proteobacteria, the bacterium Leuconostoc, and the yeast  [CLS] Candida, which can be found at low levels in raw milk [CLS]  ( Quigley et al., 2013). Whereas Candida persisted in the fungal portion of the community, the Proteobacteria were succeeded by Staphylococcus within the first 7 days. As the rinds", " the community consisted primarily of Proteobacteria, the bacterium Leuconostoc, and the yeast Candida, which can be found at low levels in raw milk ( Quigley et al., 2013). Whereas  [CLS] Candida persisted in the fungal portion of the community [CLS] , the Proteobacteria were succeeded by Staphylococcus within the first 7 days. As the rinds matured, bacterial taxa Brevibacterium and Brachybacterium and fungal taxa Penicillium and Scopulariopsis\n emerged consistently", " [CLS] cheese over a\n 63-day aging period demonstrates that patterns of succession are highly\n reproducible (Figures 7A and 7B). At the first time point, the community consisted primarily of Proteobacteria, the bacterium Leuconostoc, and the yeast Candida, which can be found at low levels in raw milk ( Quigley et al., 2013). Whereas Candida [CLS]  persisted in the fungal portion of the community, the Proteobacteria were succeeded by Staphylococcus within the first 7 days. As the rinds matured, bacterial taxa Brevibacterium and Brachybacterium and"]]
["bb_dev_219", [" Whereas Candida persisted in the fungal portion of the community, the Proteobacteria were succeeded by Staphylococcus within the first 7 days. As the rinds matured, bacterial taxa Brevibacterium and  [CLS] Brachybacterium and fungal taxa Penicillium and Scopulariopsis\n emerged consistently as a significant fraction of the community (on \naverage, >1% in mature cheeses [CLS] ). Principal coordinate analysis shows a\n reproducible trajectory of all three communities over time ( Figure 7B),\n with the most rapid changes in composition occurring at early time", " Whereas Candida persisted in the fungal portion of the community, the Proteobacteria were succeeded by Staphylococcus within the first 7 days. As the rinds matured, bacterial taxa Brevibacterium and  [CLS] Brachybacterium and fungal taxa Penicillium and Scopulariopsis\n emerged consistently as a significant fraction of the community [CLS]  (on \naverage, >1% in mature cheeses). Principal coordinate analysis shows a\n reproducible trajectory of all three communities over time ( Figure 7B),\n with the most rapid", " milk ( Quigley et al., 2013). Whereas Candida persisted in the fungal portion of the community, the Proteobacteria were succeeded by Staphylococcus within the first 7 days. As the  [CLS] rinds matured, bacterial taxa Brevibacterium and Brachybacterium [CLS]  and fungal taxa Penicillium and Scopulariopsis\n emerged consistently as a significant fraction of the community (on \naverage, >1% in mature cheeses). Principal coordinate analysis shows a\n"]]
["bb_dev_220", [" the fungal portion of the community, the Proteobacteria were succeeded by Staphylococcus within the first 7 days. As the rinds matured, bacterial taxa Brevibacterium and Brachybacterium and fungal taxa  [CLS] Penicillium and Scopulariopsis\n emerged consistently as a significant fraction of the community [CLS]  (on \naverage, >1% in mature cheeses). Principal coordinate analysis shows a\n reproducible trajectory of all three communities over time ( Figure 7B),\n with the most rapid", " milk ( Quigley et al., 2013). Whereas Candida persisted in the fungal portion of the community, the Proteobacteria were succeeded by Staphylococcus within the first 7 days. As the  [CLS] rinds matured, bacterial taxa Brevibacterium and Brachybacterium and fungal taxa Penicillium [CLS]  and Scopulariopsis\n emerged consistently as a significant fraction of the community (on \naverage, >1% in mature cheeses). Principal coordinate analysis shows a\n reproducible trajectory of all", " the fungal portion of the community, the Proteobacteria were succeeded by Staphylococcus within the first 7 days. As the rinds matured, bacterial taxa Brevibacterium and Brachybacterium and fungal taxa  [CLS] Penicillium and Scopulariopsis\n emerged consistently as a significant fraction of the community (on \naverage, >1% in mature cheeses [CLS] ). Principal coordinate analysis shows a\n reproducible trajectory of all three communities over time ( Figure 7B),\n with the most rapid changes in composition occurring at early time"]]
["seedev_train_0", ["\nin the minor groove and interactions with the phosphate backbone (Pellegrini et al. 1995). MADS domain proteins also have more divergent regions, which contribute to structural and functional specificity.  [CLS] MADS\ndomain\u2013containing regulatory factors are found in all eukaryotic organisms and play pivotal roles in regulating many different\nkinds of developmental events, including mating-type specification in yeast, muscle development in Drosophila and mammals,\nand responses to the environment [CLS]  in humans. MADS domain factors form a particularly large and diverse group in plants. In\naddition to the MADS domain, the plant proteins have another, less highly conserved domain,", "\nin the minor groove and interactions with the phosphate backbone (Pellegrini et al. 1995). MADS domain proteins also have more divergent regions, which contribute to structural and functional specificity.  [CLS] MADS\ndomain\u2013containing regulatory factors are found in all eukaryotic organisms and play pivotal roles in regulating many different\nkinds of developmental events, including mating-type specification [CLS]  in yeast, muscle development in Drosophila and mammals,\nand responses to the environment in humans. MADS domain factors form a particularly large and diverse group in plants. In\naddition"]]
["seedev_train_1", ["\nThe MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA;  [CLS] meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER [CLS] ; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in flowers. Family members that are preferentially expressed in developmental"]]
["seedev_train_2", [" et al. 1996 , Perry et al. 1999), we also performed immunolocalization analyses to determine whether the protein accumulated in the cytoplasm or the nuclei.\nBecause we found that  [CLS] AGL15 accumulates transiently in nuclei in a selected set of tissues during the vegetative and reproductive\nphases, this raises the possibility that it plays multiple roles during the plant life cycle [CLS] . To investigate these roles,\nwe have examined whether altering the expression pattern of AGL15 has any effect on postembryonic development. The results were striking and unexpected. The combination of", " Based on its expression pattern and divergent sequence, AGL15 belongs to this latter group; however, its developmental\nrole is undefined.\nOur previous findings have led us to suggest that  [CLS] AGL15 is likely to play an important regulatory role at the beginning of\nthe plant life cycle [CLS] . We initially isolated AGL15 as a low-abundance mRNA that preferentially accumulates in developing embryos (Heck et al. 1995); Rounsley et al. 1995 independently isolated it from a floral cDNA"]]
["seedev_train_3", [" (Rounsley et al. 1995) and include such factors as ANR1, which plays a role in control of root architecture in response to nutrient availability\n(Zhang and Forde 1998), and  [CLS] FLOWERING LOCUS C, a recently identified repressor of flowering [CLS]  (Michaels and Amasino 1999). Based on its expression pattern and divergent sequence, AGL15 belongs to this latter group; however, its developmental\nrole is undefined.\nOur previous findings have led"]]
["seedev_train_4", [" least 36 members in Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER;  [CLS] silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8 [CLS] , AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in flowers. Family members that are preferentially expressed in developmental\ncontexts other than the flower"]]
["seedev_train_5", [" a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known  [CLS] floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3 [CLS] ), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in"]]
["seedev_train_6", [" a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known  [CLS] floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA [CLS] ; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in flowers. Family"]]
["seedev_train_7", ["\nThe MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA;  [CLS] meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1 [CLS] ) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in flowers. Family members that are preferentially expressed"]]
["seedev_train_8", [" and unexpected. The combination of effects on the\ntransition to flowering, perianth longevity, and fruit maturation defines a new kind of developmental role for a MADS domain\nfactor. Specifically,  [CLS] AGL15 may play a role in controlling age-dependent developmental programs [CLS] , particularly in reproductive\ntissues.\n", " SERK1 complex(es) in vivo. We combined immunoprecipitation of cyan\nfluorescent protein (CFP)\u2013tagged SERK1 with rapid liquid chromatography (LC)/MALDI-TOF/MS\u2013based protein identification. Using\nthis method, we confirmed the presence in the  [CLS] SERK1 signaling complex of CDC48A (Rienties et al., 2005) and KAPP (Shah et al., 2002). Additional proteins were also found, such as another member of the 14-3-3 family, 14-3-3\u03bd, SERK3 (BAK1) and BRI1, the MADS\nbox transcription factor AGAMOUS-LIKE15 (AGL15 [CLS] ), and an uncharacterized zinc finger protein.\nIn particular, the interaction between SERK1 and BRI1 was confirmed by a genetic experiment and fluorescence lifetime imaging\nmicroscopy (FLIM) to determine F\u00f6rster"]]
["seedev_train_9", [" least 36 members in Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER;  [CLS] silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5 [CLS] ; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in flowers. Family members that are preferentially expressed in developmental\ncontexts other than the flower have also been"]]
["seedev_train_10", [" expressed in flowers. Family members that are preferentially expressed in developmental\ncontexts other than the flower have also been identified (Rounsley et al. 1995) and include such factors as  [CLS] ANR1, which plays a role in control of root architecture [CLS]  in response to nutrient availability\n(Zhang and Forde 1998), and FLOWERING LOCUS C, a recently identified repressor of flowering (Michaels and Amasino 1999). Based on its expression pattern and"]]
["seedev_train_11", [" a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known  [CLS] floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG [CLS] ), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function"]]
["seedev_train_12", ["\nin the minor groove and interactions with the phosphate backbone (Pellegrini et al. 1995). MADS domain proteins also have more divergent regions, which contribute to structural and functional specificity.  [CLS] MADS\ndomain\u2013containing regulatory factors are found in all eukaryotic organisms and play pivotal roles in regulating many different\nkinds of developmental events, including mating-type specification in yeast, muscle development [CLS]  in Drosophila and mammals,\nand responses to the environment in humans. MADS domain factors form a particularly large and diverse group in plants. In\naddition to the MADS domain,"]]
["seedev_train_13", [" least 36 members in Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER;  [CLS] silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1 [CLS] , and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in flowers. Family members that are preferentially expressed in developmental\ncontexts other than the flower have"]]
["seedev_train_14", [" [CLS] AGL15 (AGAMOUS-like 15 [CLS] ) is a member of the MADS domain family, a large, diverse family of regulatory factors. All of the members\nof this family contain a highly conserved 55\u2013 to 60\u2013amino"]]
["seedev_train_15", [" family consists of at least 36 members in Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators  [CLS] APETALA1 (AP1 [CLS] ) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in flowers. Family members that are preferentially expressed"]]
["seedev_train_16", [" (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators  [CLS] AGAMOUS (AG [CLS] ), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function"]]
["seedev_train_17", [" Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG),  [CLS] APETALA3 (AP3 [CLS] ), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in"]]
["seedev_train_18", [" Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators  [CLS] FRUITFULL/AGL8 [CLS] , AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in flowers. Family members that are preferentially expressed in developmental\ncontexts other than the flower"]]
["seedev_train_19", [" revealed any genes likely to represent\nrecent duplications of the AGL15 locus. The only members of the MADS domain family in Arabidopsis that are known to be expressed in  [CLS] embryos are AGL15 and AGL2 [CLS]  (Flanagan and Ma 1994). AGL15 shows strong preferential expression in embryos, whereas AGL2 is predominantly expressed in floral tissues (Heck et al. 1995). Using AGL15-specific antibodies, we have shown", " revealed any genes likely to represent\nrecent duplications of the AGL15 locus. The only members of the MADS domain family in Arabidopsis that are known to be expressed in  [CLS] embryos are AGL15 [CLS]  and AGL2 (Flanagan and Ma 1994). AGL15 shows strong preferential expression in embryos, whereas AGL2 is predominantly expressed in floral tissues (Heck et al. 1995). Using AGL15-specific antibodies, we", " the AGL15 locus. The only members of the MADS domain family in Arabidopsis that are known to be expressed in embryos are AGL15 and AGL2 (Flanagan and Ma 1994).  [CLS] AGL15 shows strong preferential expression in embryos [CLS] , whereas AGL2 is predominantly expressed in floral tissues (Heck et al. 1995). Using AGL15-specific antibodies, we have shown that AGL15 accumulates in the nuclei of young embryos, endosperm, and", " dcl1-null mutant embryos overexpress \u223c50 miRNA targets. In dcl1 eight-cell embryos, the two most up-regulated targets are those of miR156 and encode SPL10 and SPL11 transcription factors.\nSPL10 and  [CLS] SPL11 are derepressed >150-fold in dcl1 embryos [CLS]  and are redundantly required for the dcl1 early patterning defects. Moreover, as early as the eight-cell stage, miR156-mediated repression of zygotic SPL transcripts prevents premature accumulation of transcripts from", " (\u223c32-cell) stage, dcl1-null mutant embryos overexpress \u223c50 miRNA targets. In dcl1 eight-cell embryos, the two most up-regulated targets are those of miR156 and encode SPL10 and SPL11 transcription factors.\n [CLS] SPL10 and SPL11 are derepressed >150-fold in dcl1 embryos [CLS]  and are redundantly required for the dcl1 early patterning defects. Moreover, as early as the eight-cell stage, miR156-mediated repression of zygotic SPL transcripts prevents premature accumulation of transcripts from", " detected in about a quarter of eight-cell and dermatogen stage embryos (seven of 35 and 14 of 52, respectively)\nfrom self-pollinated dcl1-5/+ plants (Fig. 1B), which implied that dcl1-5  [CLS] embryos had undetectable WOX2 [CLS]  expression. Similar to WOX2, PINHEAD/ZWILLE/ARGONAUTE10 transcripts, hereafter referred to as PNH, are localized in the apical cell lineage of preglobular embryos (Lynn et al. 1999). Approximately 89% (72 of", " the timing of the different components of the\nprogram seems to be unaffected. In particular, we still see accumulation of chlorophyll preceding the expression of the seed\nstorage protein  [CLS] At2S3, as in wild-type embryos [CLS] . It is tempting to speculate that miRNAs regulate the initiation, but not the progression, of maturation.\n"]]
["seedev_train_20", [" findings, plus an awareness that expression patterns have provided important insights into the developmental roles\nof MADS domain factors in past investigations, motivated us to look more closely at  [CLS] AGL15 expression in postembryonic phases [CLS] . We combined an analysis of AGL15 promoter activity with an examination of mRNA and protein accumulation to examine both qualitative and quantitative aspects\nof AGL15 expression. Because the cellular"]]
["seedev_train_21", [" MADS domain family in Arabidopsis that are known to be expressed in embryos are AGL15 and AGL2 (Flanagan and Ma 1994). AGL15 shows strong preferential expression in embryos, whereas  [CLS] AGL2 is predominantly expressed in floral tissues [CLS]  (Heck et al. 1995). Using AGL15-specific antibodies, we have shown that AGL15 accumulates in the nuclei of young embryos, endosperm, and suspensor\ncells but only in the cytoplasm of"]]
["seedev_train_22", [" play pivotal roles in regulating many different\nkinds of developmental events, including mating-type specification in yeast, muscle development in Drosophila and mammals,\nand responses to the environment in humans.  [CLS] MADS domain factors form a particularly large and diverse group in plants [CLS] . In\naddition to the MADS domain, the plant proteins have another, less highly conserved domain, the K domain, which is thought\nto serve as a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed"]]
["seedev_train_23", [" similarly regulated in a wide variety of embryogenic situations (Perry et al. 1999).\nAlthough AGL15 accumulates preferentially in embryos, its accumulation is clearly not restricted to the embryonic phase.  [CLS] AGL15 transcripts have been detected in young Arabidopsis seedlings [CLS]  by using in situ hybridization (Rounsley et al. 1995) and in various tissues (including flowers) in Brassica by using RNA gel blot analyses (Heck et al. 1995). These findings,", " similarly regulated in a wide variety of embryogenic situations (Perry et al. 1999).\nAlthough AGL15 accumulates preferentially in embryos, its accumulation is clearly not restricted to the embryonic phase.  [CLS] AGL15 transcripts have been detected in young Arabidopsis seedlings by using in situ hybridization (Rounsley et al. 1995) and in various tissues (including flowers [CLS] ) in Brassica by using RNA gel blot analyses (Heck et al. 1995). These findings, plus an awareness that expression patterns have provided important insights into the developmental roles\nof"]]
["seedev_train_24", [" organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother  [CLS] AGL factors of unknown function expressed in flowers [CLS] . Family members that are preferentially expressed in developmental\ncontexts other than the flower have also been identified (Rounsley et al. 1995) and include such factors as ANR1, which plays"]]
["seedev_train_25", ["\nin the minor groove and interactions with the phosphate backbone (Pellegrini et al. 1995). MADS domain proteins also have more divergent regions, which contribute to structural and functional specificity.  [CLS] MADS\ndomain\u2013containing regulatory factors are found in all eukaryotic organisms [CLS]  and play pivotal roles in regulating many different\nkinds of developmental events, including mating-type specification in yeast, muscle development in Drosophila and mammals,\nand responses to the environment in", "\nin the minor groove and interactions with the phosphate backbone (Pellegrini et al. 1995). MADS domain proteins also have more divergent regions, which contribute to structural and functional specificity.  [CLS] MADS\ndomain\u2013containing regulatory factors are found in all eukaryotic organisms and play pivotal roles in regulating many different\nkinds of developmental events, including mating-type specification in yeast, muscle development in Drosophila and mammals,\nand responses to the environment in humans [CLS] . MADS domain factors form a particularly large and diverse group in plants. In\naddition to the MADS domain, the plant proteins have another, less highly conserved domain, the K", "\nin the minor groove and interactions with the phosphate backbone (Pellegrini et al. 1995). MADS domain proteins also have more divergent regions, which contribute to structural and functional specificity.  [CLS] MADS\ndomain\u2013containing regulatory factors are found in all eukaryotic organisms and play pivotal roles in regulating many different\nkinds of developmental events, including mating-type specification in yeast, muscle development in Drosophila and mammals [CLS] ,\nand responses to the environment in humans. MADS domain factors form a particularly large and diverse group in plants. In\naddition to the MADS domain, the plant proteins have", "\nin the minor groove and interactions with the phosphate backbone (Pellegrini et al. 1995). MADS domain proteins also have more divergent regions, which contribute to structural and functional specificity.  [CLS] MADS\ndomain\u2013containing regulatory factors are found in all eukaryotic organisms and play pivotal roles in regulating many different\nkinds of developmental events, including mating-type specification in yeast [CLS] , muscle development in Drosophila and mammals,\nand responses to the environment in humans. MADS domain factors form a particularly large and diverse group in plants. In\naddition to the", "\nin the minor groove and interactions with the phosphate backbone (Pellegrini et al. 1995). MADS domain proteins also have more divergent regions, which contribute to structural and functional specificity.  [CLS] MADS\ndomain\u2013containing regulatory factors are found in all eukaryotic organisms and play pivotal roles in regulating many different\nkinds of developmental events, including mating-type specification in yeast, muscle development in Drosophila [CLS]  and mammals,\nand responses to the environment in humans. MADS domain factors form a particularly large and diverse group in plants. In\naddition to the MADS domain, the plant"]]
["seedev_train_26", [" and Ma 1994). AGL15 shows strong preferential expression in embryos, whereas AGL2 is predominantly expressed in floral tissues (Heck et al. 1995). Using AGL15-specific antibodies, we have shown that  [CLS] AGL15 accumulates in the nuclei of young embryos, endosperm [CLS] , and suspensor\ncells but only in the cytoplasm of the egg cell (Perry et al. 1996). More recently, we found that AGL15 is similarly regulated in a wide variety", " an analysis of AGL15 promoter activity with an examination of mRNA and protein accumulation to examine both qualitative and quantitative aspects\nof AGL15 expression. Because the cellular localization of  [CLS] AGL15 is regulated in embryos [CLS]  (Perry et al. 1996 , Perry et al. 1999), we also performed immunolocalization analyses to determine whether the protein accumulated in the cytoplasm or the nuclei.\nBecause we found", " of the egg cell (Perry et al. 1996). More recently, we found that AGL15 is similarly regulated in a wide variety of embryogenic situations (Perry et al. 1999).\nAlthough  [CLS] AGL15 accumulates preferentially in embryos [CLS] , its accumulation is clearly not restricted to the embryonic phase. AGL15 transcripts have been detected in young Arabidopsis seedlings by using in situ hybridization (Rounsley et al. 1995) and", " and Ma 1994). AGL15 shows strong preferential expression in embryos, whereas AGL2 is predominantly expressed in floral tissues (Heck et al. 1995). Using AGL15-specific antibodies, we have shown that  [CLS] AGL15 accumulates in the nuclei of young embryos, endosperm, and suspensor\ncells but only in the cytoplasm of the egg cell [CLS]  (Perry et al. 1996). More recently, we found that AGL15 is similarly regulated in a wide variety of embryogenic situations (Perry et al. 1999).\nAlthough AGL15 accumulates preferentially in", " and Ma 1994). AGL15 shows strong preferential expression in embryos, whereas AGL2 is predominantly expressed in floral tissues (Heck et al. 1995). Using AGL15-specific antibodies, we have shown that  [CLS] AGL15 accumulates in the nuclei of young embryos, endosperm, and suspensor\ncells [CLS]  but only in the cytoplasm of the egg cell (Perry et al. 1996). More recently, we found that AGL15 is similarly regulated in a wide variety of embryogenic situations", " et al. 1996 , Perry et al. 1999), we also performed immunolocalization analyses to determine whether the protein accumulated in the cytoplasm or the nuclei.\nBecause we found that  [CLS] AGL15 accumulates transiently in nuclei [CLS]  in a selected set of tissues during the vegetative and reproductive\nphases, this raises the possibility that it plays multiple roles during the plant life cycle. To investigate these", " and Ma 1994). AGL15 shows strong preferential expression in embryos, whereas AGL2 is predominantly expressed in floral tissues (Heck et al. 1995). Using AGL15-specific antibodies, we have shown that  [CLS] AGL15 accumulates in the nuclei of young embryos [CLS] , endosperm, and suspensor\ncells but only in the cytoplasm of the egg cell (Perry et al. 1996). More recently, we found that AGL15 is similarly regulated in a wide", " and unexpected. The combination of effects on the\ntransition to flowering, perianth longevity, and fruit maturation defines a new kind of developmental role for a MADS domain\nfactor. Specifically,  [CLS] AGL15 may play a role in controlling age-dependent developmental programs, particularly in reproductive\ntissues [CLS] .\n", " [CLS] AGL15 protein\napproach those seen in young embryos only during the earliest stages of vegetative growth in the shoot apex [CLS]  of Arabidopsis.\nWith the onset of the reproductive phase, AGL15 promoter activity ceases in the meristematic cells at the apex of the inflorescence. This pattern of gene regulation further", " young organ primordia but is gradually restricted to the base of the maturing\norgans.\nGiven the patterns of AGL15 promoter activity and mRNA and protein accumulation, we conclude that  [CLS] AGL15 function is most likely associated with the shoot\napical meristems [CLS]  and with young vegetative organs during the juvenile stage of the vegetative phase, when the protein concentrations\nare highest, and with floral organs up to the point at which", " [CLS] nuclear-localized AGL15 [CLS]  protein\napproach those seen in young embryos only during the earliest stages of vegetative growth in the shoot apex of Arabidopsis.\nWith the onset of the reproductive phase, AGL15", " young organ primordia but is gradually restricted to the base of the maturing\norgans.\nGiven the patterns of AGL15 promoter activity and mRNA and protein accumulation, we conclude that  [CLS] AGL15 function is most likely associated with the shoot\napical meristems and with young vegetative organs during the juvenile stage of the vegetative phase, when the protein concentrations\nare highest, and with floral organs [CLS]  up to the point at which they are fully mature. To define more clearly any possible regulatory\nroles, we turned to an analysis of transgenic plants that express AGL15", " young organ primordia but is gradually restricted to the base of the maturing\norgans.\nGiven the patterns of AGL15 promoter activity and mRNA and protein accumulation, we conclude that  [CLS] AGL15 function is most likely associated with the shoot\napical meristems and with young vegetative organs [CLS]  during the juvenile stage of the vegetative phase, when the protein concentrations\nare highest, and with floral organs up to the point at which they are fully mature. To", " interact directly with the kinase domain of the Arabidopsis meristematic receptor-like kinase and to be phosphorylated by the kinase domain of the receptor in vitro (Fujita et al.,\n2003).  [CLS] AGL15 was shown to accumulate in nuclei but also to be present in the cytoplasm [CLS]  (Perry et al., 1996). SERK1 and AGL15 are highly expressed during embryogenic cell formation in culture and during early embryogenesis. As found\nfor SERK1 (Hecht et al., 2001), AGL15", " of SAP18 alone, possibly indicating a more specific interaction at these loci. We have demonstrated that AGL15 binds to LEA76 (At1g52690) (Figure 6a), and that LEA76 is repressed by  [CLS] AGL15 and/or SAP18 in a variety of tissues, including seedlings [CLS]  (Figure 5). Published results support a role for SIN3/HDAC1-mediated repression in regulation of LEA76: trichostatin\u00a0A, a specific inhibitor of HDAC, causes an increase in LEA76 transcript during seed germination"]]
["seedev_train_27", ["\nOur previous findings have led us to suggest that AGL15 is likely to play an important regulatory role at the beginning of\nthe plant life cycle. We initially isolated  [CLS] AGL15 as a low-abundance mRNA that preferentially accumulates in developing embryos [CLS]  (Heck et al. 1995); Rounsley et al. 1995 independently isolated it from a floral cDNA library. AGL15 is a single-copy gene in Arabidopsis, and thus far, genome sequencing efforts"]]
["seedev_train_28", [" muscle development in Drosophila and mammals,\nand responses to the environment in humans. MADS domain factors form a particularly large and diverse group in plants. In\naddition to the  [CLS] MADS domain, the plant [CLS]  proteins have another, less highly conserved domain, the K domain, which is thought\nto serve as a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe MADS domain"]]
["seedev_train_29", [" [CLS] MADS domain family, a large, diverse family of regulatory factors. All of the members\nof this family contain a highly conserved 55\u2013 to 60\u2013amino acid domain, known as the MADS domain [CLS] , which binds DNA through contacts\nin the minor groove and interactions with the phosphate backbone (Pellegrini et al. 1995). MADS domain proteins also have more divergent regions, which contribute"]]
["seedev_train_30", [" initially isolated AGL15 as a low-abundance mRNA that preferentially accumulates in developing embryos (Heck et al. 1995); Rounsley et al. 1995 independently isolated it from a floral cDNA library.  [CLS] AGL15 is a single-copy gene in Arabidopsis [CLS] , and thus far, genome sequencing efforts have not revealed any genes likely to represent\nrecent duplications of the AGL15 locus. The only members of the MADS domain family in", " and thus far, genome sequencing efforts have not revealed any genes likely to represent\nrecent duplications of the AGL15 locus. The only members of the MADS domain family in  [CLS] Arabidopsis that are known to be expressed in embryos are AGL15 [CLS]  and AGL2 (Flanagan and Ma 1994). AGL15 shows strong preferential expression in embryos, whereas AGL2 is predominantly expressed in floral tissues (Heck et al. 1995). Using AGL15-specific antibodies, we"]]
["seedev_train_31", [" Drosophila and mammals,\nand responses to the environment in humans. MADS domain factors form a particularly large and diverse group in plants. In\naddition to the MADS domain, the  [CLS] plant proteins have another, less highly conserved domain, the K domain [CLS] , which is thought\nto serve as a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in Arabidopsis (Liljegren"]]
["seedev_train_32", [" the plant proteins have another, less highly conserved domain, the K domain, which is thought\nto serve as a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe  [CLS] MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA [CLS] ; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in flowers. Family"]]
["seedev_train_33", [" the plant proteins have another, less highly conserved domain, the K domain, which is thought\nto serve as a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe  [CLS] MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3 [CLS] ), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in"]]
["seedev_train_34", [" the plant proteins have another, less highly conserved domain, the K domain, which is thought\nto serve as a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe  [CLS] MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1 [CLS] ) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in flowers. Family members that are preferentially expressed"]]
["seedev_train_35", [" the plant proteins have another, less highly conserved domain, the K domain, which is thought\nto serve as a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe  [CLS] MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER [CLS] ; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in flowers. Family members that are preferentially expressed in developmental"]]
["seedev_train_36", [" the plant proteins have another, less highly conserved domain, the K domain, which is thought\nto serve as a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe  [CLS] MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG [CLS] ), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function"]]
["seedev_train_37", [" the plant proteins have another, less highly conserved domain, the K domain, which is thought\nto serve as a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe  [CLS] MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1 [CLS] , and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in flowers. Family members that are preferentially expressed in developmental\ncontexts other than the flower have"]]
["seedev_train_38", [" the plant proteins have another, less highly conserved domain, the K domain, which is thought\nto serve as a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe  [CLS] MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5 [CLS] ; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in flowers. Family members that are preferentially expressed in developmental\ncontexts other than the flower have also been"]]
["seedev_train_39", [" the plant proteins have another, less highly conserved domain, the K domain, which is thought\nto serve as a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe  [CLS] MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in flowers. Family members that are preferentially expressed in developmental\ncontexts other than the flower have also been identified (Rounsley et al. 1995) and include such factors as ANR1 [CLS] , which plays a role in control of root architecture in response to nutrient availability\n(Zhang and Forde 1998), and FLOWERING LOCUS C, a recently identified repressor of flowering (Michaels"]]
["seedev_train_40", [" [CLS] AGL15 (AGAMOUS-like 15) is a member of the MADS domain family [CLS] , a large, diverse family of regulatory factors. All of the members\nof this family contain a highly conserved 55\u2013 to 60\u2013amino acid domain, known as the MADS domain, which", " (Rienties et al., 2005) and KAPP (Shah et al., 2002). Additional proteins were also found, such as another member of the 14-3-3 family, 14-3-3\u03bd, SERK3 (BAK1) and BRI1, the  [CLS] MADS\nbox transcription factor AGAMOUS-LIKE15 (AGL15 [CLS] ), and an uncharacterized zinc finger protein.\nIn particular, the interaction between SERK1 and BRI1 was confirmed by a genetic experiment and fluorescence lifetime imaging\nmicroscopy (FLIM) to determine F\u00f6rster"]]
["seedev_train_41", [" the plant proteins have another, less highly conserved domain, the K domain, which is thought\nto serve as a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe  [CLS] MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in flowers. Family members that are preferentially expressed in developmental\ncontexts other than the flower have also been identified (Rounsley et al. 1995) and include such factors as ANR1, which plays a role in control of root architecture in response to nutrient availability\n(Zhang and Forde 1998), and FLOWERING LOCUS C [CLS] , a recently identified repressor of flowering (Michaels and Amasino 1999). Based on its expression pattern and divergent sequence, AGL15 belongs to this latter group; however, its developmental\nrole is"]]
["seedev_train_42", [" the plant proteins have another, less highly conserved domain, the K domain, which is thought\nto serve as a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe  [CLS] MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8 [CLS] , AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in flowers. Family members that are preferentially expressed in developmental\ncontexts other than the flower"]]
["seedev_train_43", [" single-copy gene in Arabidopsis, and thus far, genome sequencing efforts have not revealed any genes likely to represent\nrecent duplications of the AGL15 locus. The only members of the  [CLS] MADS domain family in Arabidopsis that are known to be expressed in embryos are AGL15 [CLS]  and AGL2 (Flanagan and Ma 1994). AGL15 shows strong preferential expression in embryos, whereas AGL2 is predominantly expressed in floral tissues (Heck et al. 1995). Using AGL15-specific antibodies, we"]]
["seedev_train_44", [" single-copy gene in Arabidopsis, and thus far, genome sequencing efforts have not revealed any genes likely to represent\nrecent duplications of the AGL15 locus. The only members of the  [CLS] MADS domain family in Arabidopsis that are known to be expressed in embryos are AGL15 and AGL2 [CLS]  (Flanagan and Ma 1994). AGL15 shows strong preferential expression in embryos, whereas AGL2 is predominantly expressed in floral tissues (Heck et al. 1995). Using AGL15-specific antibodies, we have shown"]]
["seedev_train_45", [" similarly regulated in a wide variety of embryogenic situations (Perry et al. 1999).\nAlthough AGL15 accumulates preferentially in embryos, its accumulation is clearly not restricted to the embryonic phase.  [CLS] AGL15 transcripts have been detected in young Arabidopsis [CLS]  seedlings by using in situ hybridization (Rounsley et al. 1995) and in various tissues (including flowers) in Brassica by using RNA gel blot analyses (Heck et al. 1995). These", " similarly regulated in a wide variety of embryogenic situations (Perry et al. 1999).\nAlthough AGL15 accumulates preferentially in embryos, its accumulation is clearly not restricted to the embryonic phase.  [CLS] AGL15 transcripts have been detected in young Arabidopsis seedlings by using in situ hybridization (Rounsley et al. 1995) and in various tissues (including flowers) in Brassica [CLS]  by using RNA gel blot analyses (Heck et al. 1995). These findings, plus an awareness that expression patterns have provided important insights into the developmental roles\nof MADS domain"]]
["seedev_train_46", [" K domain, which is thought\nto serve as a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in  [CLS] Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors [CLS]  of unknown function expressed in flowers. Family members that are preferentially expressed in developmental\ncontexts other than the flower have also been identified (Rounsley et al. 1995) and include"]]
["seedev_train_47", [" and thus far, genome sequencing efforts have not revealed any genes likely to represent\nrecent duplications of the AGL15 locus. The only members of the MADS domain family in  [CLS] Arabidopsis that are known to be expressed in embryos are AGL15 and AGL2 [CLS]  (Flanagan and Ma 1994). AGL15 shows strong preferential expression in embryos, whereas AGL2 is predominantly expressed in floral tissues (Heck et al. 1995). Using AGL15-specific antibodies, we have shown"]]
["seedev_train_48", [" single-copy gene in Arabidopsis, and thus far, genome sequencing efforts have not revealed any genes likely to represent\nrecent duplications of the AGL15 locus. The only members of the  [CLS] MADS domain family in Arabidopsis [CLS]  that are known to be expressed in embryos are AGL15 and AGL2 (Flanagan and Ma 1994). AGL15 shows strong preferential expression in embryos, whereas AGL2 is predominantly expressed in", " the plant proteins have another, less highly conserved domain, the K domain, which is thought\nto serve as a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe  [CLS] MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in Arabidopsis [CLS]  (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8,"]]
["seedev_train_49", [" K domain, which is thought\nto serve as a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in  [CLS] Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in flowers. Family members that are preferentially expressed in developmental\ncontexts other than the flower have also been identified (Rounsley et al. 1995) and include such factors as ANR1 [CLS] , which plays a role in control of root architecture in response to nutrient availability\n(Zhang and Forde 1998), and FLOWERING LOCUS C, a recently identified repressor of flowering (Michaels"]]
["seedev_train_50", [" K domain, which is thought\nto serve as a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in  [CLS] Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in flowers. Family members that are preferentially expressed in developmental\ncontexts other than the flower have also been identified (Rounsley et al. 1995) and include such factors as ANR1, which plays a role in control of root architecture in response to nutrient availability\n(Zhang and Forde 1998), and FLOWERING LOCUS C [CLS] , a recently identified repressor of flowering (Michaels and Amasino 1999). Based on its expression pattern and divergent sequence, AGL15 belongs to this latter group; however, its developmental\nrole is"]]
["seedev_train_51", [" K domain, which is thought\nto serve as a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in  [CLS] Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER [CLS] ; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in flowers. Family members that are preferentially expressed in developmental"]]
["seedev_train_52", [" K domain, which is thought\nto serve as a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in  [CLS] Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8 [CLS] , AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in flowers. Family members that are preferentially expressed in developmental\ncontexts other than the flower"]]
["seedev_train_53", [" K domain, which is thought\nto serve as a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in  [CLS] Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3 [CLS] ), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in"]]
["seedev_train_54", [" K domain, which is thought\nto serve as a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in  [CLS] Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA [CLS] ; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in flowers. Family"]]
["seedev_train_55", [" K domain, which is thought\nto serve as a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in  [CLS] Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1 [CLS] ) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in flowers. Family members that are preferentially expressed"]]
["seedev_train_56", [" K domain, which is thought\nto serve as a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in  [CLS] Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5 [CLS] ; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in flowers. Family members that are preferentially expressed in developmental\ncontexts other than the flower have also been"]]
["seedev_train_57", [" K domain, which is thought\nto serve as a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in  [CLS] Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG [CLS] ), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function"]]
["seedev_train_58", [" K domain, which is thought\nto serve as a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in  [CLS] Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1 [CLS] , and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in flowers. Family members that are preferentially expressed in developmental\ncontexts other than the flower have"]]
["seedev_train_59", [" found in all eukaryotic organisms and play pivotal roles in regulating many different\nkinds of developmental events, including mating-type specification in yeast, muscle development in Drosophila and mammals,\nand  [CLS] responses to the environment in humans [CLS] . MADS domain factors form a particularly large and diverse group in plants. In\naddition to the MADS domain, the plant proteins have another, less highly conserved domain, the K"]]
["seedev_train_60", [" functional specificity. MADS\ndomain\u2013containing regulatory factors are found in all eukaryotic organisms and play pivotal roles in regulating many different\nkinds of developmental events, including mating-type specification in yeast,  [CLS] muscle development in Drosophila and mammals [CLS] ,\nand responses to the environment in humans. MADS domain factors form a particularly large and diverse group in plants. In\naddition to the MADS domain, the plant proteins have"]]
["seedev_train_61", [" contribute to structural and functional specificity. MADS\ndomain\u2013containing regulatory factors are found in all eukaryotic organisms and play pivotal roles in regulating many different\nkinds of developmental events, including  [CLS] mating-type specification in yeast [CLS] , muscle development in Drosophila and mammals,\nand responses to the environment in humans. MADS domain factors form a particularly large and diverse group in plants. In\naddition to the"]]
["seedev_train_62", [" K domain, which is thought\nto serve as a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in  [CLS] Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity [CLS] \nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in flowers. Family members that", " K domain, which is thought\nto serve as a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in  [CLS] Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity [CLS]  regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors", " K domain, which is thought\nto serve as a protein\u2013protein interaction domain (reviewed in Riechmann and Meyerowitz 1997).\nThe MADS domain family consists of at least 36 members in  [CLS] Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al. 1998), including the well-known floral organ identity regulators AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3), and PISTILLATA; meristem identity\nregulators APETALA1 (AP1) and CAULIFLOWER; silique tissue identity [CLS]  regulators FRUITFULL/AGL8, AGL1, and AGL5; and a set of\nother AGL factors of unknown function expressed in flowers. Family members that are preferentially expressed in developmental\ncontexts other than", " [CLS] Arabidopsis have been shown to interact genetically in regulating processes such as germination [CLS]  and ABA-inducible gene expression. To determine whether ABI4 or ABI5 can physically interact with themselves or any of the other ABIs, we tested pairwise combinations in yeast two-hybrid interaction", " [CLS] Arabidopsis LEAFY COTYLEDON2\n(LEC2) gene is a central embryonic regulator that serves\ncritical roles both early and late during embryo development [CLS] .\nLEC2 is required for the maintenance of suspensor\nmorphology, specification of cotyledon identity, progression through\nthe maturation phase, and suppression of premature germination. We\ncloned the LEC2 gene on", " [CLS] Arabidopsis LEAFY COTYLEDON2\n(LEC2) gene is a central embryonic regulator that serves\ncritical roles both early and late during embryo development [CLS] .\nLEC2 is required for the maintenance of suspensor\nmorphology, specification of cotyledon identity, progression through\nthe maturation phase, and suppression of premature germination. We\ncloned the LEC2 gene on", " appear to intersect with those\nof AP2. Mutations in the Arabidopsis WRINKLED1 gene lead to defects in carbohydrate metabolism and reductions in seed mass and oil content (38, 54).  [CLS] Arabidopsis AINTEGUMENTA gene is thought to play a role in controlling cell proliferation [CLS]  (55, 56). Ectopic expression of AINTEGUMENTA caused plant organs, including seeds, to increase in size in both transgenic Arabidopsis and tobacco (57). The increase in seed size in transgenic", " [CLS] embryo development is regulated by a network of transcription factors that include LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1), LEC1-LIKE (L1L), and B3 domain factors, LEAFY COTYLEDON 2 (LEC2), FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3) of Arabidopsis [CLS]  (Arabidopsis thaliana). Interactions of these genes result in temporal progression of overlapping B3 gene expression culminating in maturation\nand desiccation of the seed. Three VP1/ABI3-LIKE (VAL) genes encode B3", " [CLS] Arabidopsis LEAFY COTYLEDON1 (LEC1) gene is required for the specification of cotyledon identity and the completion of embryo maturation [CLS] . We isolated the LEC1 gene and showed that it functions at an early developmental stage to maintain embryonic cell fate. The LEC1 gene encodes a transcription factor homolog, the", " finding of co-expression at differing levels, however, is consistent with the fact that FUS3 and ABI3, in a combinatorial and synergistic fashion, control overlapping yet not identical aspects of  [CLS] Arabidopsis seed maturation [CLS]  (Parcy et\u00a0al. 1997). Future studies will have to elucidate to what extent structural similarities of FUS3 and ABI3 contribute to this synergism.\nSo far, FUS3 is the smallest member"]]
["seedev_train_63", [" the\ntransition to flowering, perianth longevity, and fruit maturation defines a new kind of developmental role for a MADS domain\nfactor. Specifically, AGL15 may play a role in controlling  [CLS] age-dependent developmental programs, particularly in reproductive\ntissues [CLS] .\n"]]
["seedev_train_64", [" functional specificity. MADS\ndomain\u2013containing regulatory factors are found in all eukaryotic organisms and play pivotal roles in regulating many different\nkinds of developmental events, including mating-type specification in yeast,  [CLS] muscle development in Drosophila [CLS]  and mammals,\nand responses to the environment in humans. MADS domain factors form a particularly large and diverse group in plants. In\naddition to the MADS domain, the plant"]]
["seedev_train_65", [" and thus far, genome sequencing efforts have not revealed any genes likely to represent\nrecent duplications of the AGL15 locus. The only members of the MADS domain family in  [CLS] Arabidopsis that are known to be expressed in embryos are AGL15 and AGL2 [CLS]  (Flanagan and Ma 1994). AGL15 shows strong preferential expression in embryos, whereas AGL2 is predominantly expressed in floral tissues (Heck et al. 1995). Using AGL15-specific antibodies, we have shown", " and thus far, genome sequencing efforts have not revealed any genes likely to represent\nrecent duplications of the AGL15 locus. The only members of the MADS domain family in  [CLS] Arabidopsis that are known to be expressed in embryos are AGL15 [CLS]  and AGL2 (Flanagan and Ma 1994). AGL15 shows strong preferential expression in embryos, whereas AGL2 is predominantly expressed in floral tissues (Heck et al. 1995). Using AGL15-specific antibodies, we", " limited number of organs have been formed\n(Lenhard et al., 2001; Lohmann et al., 2001).\nThe primary shoot meristem is formed during embryo development (Barton and Poethig, 1993). In  [CLS] Arabidopsis, the onset of WUS [CLS]  expression in precursor cells of the OC in the 16-cell embryo suggests that shoot meristem formation has been initiated already\nat this stage (Mayer et al., 1998). CLV3 expression"]]
["seedev_train_66", [" reproductive phase and are induced or upregulated during the transition to\nflowering (Hempel et al. 1997). In terms of regulation, AGL15 is most similar to the MADS box gene  [CLS] FLOWERING LOCUS C, which encodes a repressor of flowering [CLS]  and is also downregulated in the transition to flowering (Michaels and Amasino 1999).\nDuring the reproductive phase, AGL15 promoter activity is also associated with young immature cells. Cell maturation"]]
["seedev_train_67", [" et al. 1998), which are preferentially expressed during the reproductive phase and are induced or upregulated during the transition to\nflowering (Hempel et al. 1997). In terms of regulation,  [CLS] AGL15 is most similar to the MADS box gene FLOWERING LOCUS C, which encodes a repressor of flowering [CLS]  and is also downregulated in the transition to flowering (Michaels and Amasino 1999).\nDuring the reproductive phase, AGL15 promoter activity is also associated with young immature cells. Cell maturation"]]
["seedev_train_68", [" et al. 1998), which are preferentially expressed during the reproductive phase and are induced or upregulated during the transition to\nflowering (Hempel et al. 1997). In terms of regulation,  [CLS] AGL15 is most similar to the MADS box gene FLOWERING LOCUS C [CLS] , which encodes a repressor of flowering and is also downregulated in the transition to flowering (Michaels and Amasino 1999).\nDuring the reproductive phase, AGL15 promoter activity is also associated"]]
["seedev_train_69", [" the apex of the inflorescence. This pattern of gene regulation further\ndistinguishes AGL15 from the large group of floral MADS box genes, including AP1 (Mandel et al. 1992b) and  [CLS] FRUITFULL/AGL8 [CLS]  (Mandel and Yanofsky 1995a ; Gu et al. 1998), which are preferentially expressed during the reproductive phase and are induced or upregulated during the transition to\nflowering (Hempel et"]]
["seedev_train_70", [" Arabidopsis.\nWith the onset of the reproductive phase, AGL15 promoter activity ceases in the meristematic cells at the apex of the inflorescence. This pattern of gene regulation further\ndistinguishes  [CLS] AGL15 from the large group of floral MADS box genes, including AP1 (Mandel et al. 1992b) and FRUITFULL/AGL8 [CLS]  (Mandel and Yanofsky 1995a ; Gu et al. 1998), which are preferentially expressed during the reproductive phase and are induced or upregulated during the transition to\nflowering (Hempel et", " Arabidopsis.\nWith the onset of the reproductive phase, AGL15 promoter activity ceases in the meristematic cells at the apex of the inflorescence. This pattern of gene regulation further\ndistinguishes  [CLS] AGL15 from the large group of floral MADS box genes, including AP1 [CLS]  (Mandel et al. 1992b) and FRUITFULL/AGL8 (Mandel and Yanofsky 1995a ; Gu et al. 1998), which are preferentially expressed during the reproductive phase and are induced or upregulated during"]]
["seedev_train_71", [" ceases in the meristematic cells at the apex of the inflorescence. This pattern of gene regulation further\ndistinguishes AGL15 from the large group of floral MADS box genes, including  [CLS] AP1 (Mandel et al. 1992b) and FRUITFULL/AGL8 (Mandel and Yanofsky 1995a ; Gu et al. 1998), which are preferentially expressed during the reproductive phase and are induced or upregulated during the transition to\nflowering [CLS]  (Hempel et al. 1997). In terms of regulation, AGL15 is most similar to the MADS box gene FLOWERING LOCUS C, which encodes a repressor of flowering and is also", " reproductive phase and are induced or upregulated during the transition to\nflowering (Hempel et al. 1997). In terms of regulation, AGL15 is most similar to the MADS box gene  [CLS] FLOWERING LOCUS C, which encodes a repressor of flowering and is also downregulated in the transition to flowering [CLS]  (Michaels and Amasino 1999).\nDuring the reproductive phase, AGL15 promoter activity is also associated with young immature cells. Cell maturation proceeds in the apical-to-basal direction\nin floral organs, as", " et al. 1998), which are preferentially expressed during the reproductive phase and are induced or upregulated during the transition to\nflowering (Hempel et al. 1997). In terms of regulation,  [CLS] AGL15 is most similar to the MADS box gene FLOWERING LOCUS C, which encodes a repressor of flowering and is also downregulated in the transition to flowering [CLS]  (Michaels and Amasino 1999).\nDuring the reproductive phase, AGL15 promoter activity is also associated with young immature cells. Cell maturation proceeds in the apical-to-basal direction\nin floral organs, as", " the apex of the inflorescence. This pattern of gene regulation further\ndistinguishes AGL15 from the large group of floral MADS box genes, including AP1 (Mandel et al. 1992b) and FRUITFULL/ [CLS] AGL8 (Mandel and Yanofsky 1995a ; Gu et al. 1998), which are preferentially expressed during the reproductive phase and are induced or upregulated during the transition to\nflowering [CLS]  (Hempel et al. 1997). In terms of regulation, AGL15 is most similar to the MADS box gene FLOWERING LOCUS C, which encodes a repressor of flowering and is also"]]
["seedev_train_72", [" ceases in the meristematic cells at the apex of the inflorescence. This pattern of gene regulation further\ndistinguishes AGL15 from the large group of floral MADS box genes, including  [CLS] AP1 (Mandel et al. 1992b) and FRUITFULL/AGL8 (Mandel and Yanofsky 1995a ; Gu et al. 1998), which are preferentially expressed during the reproductive phase [CLS]  and are induced or upregulated during the transition to\nflowering (Hempel et al. 1997). In terms of regulation, AGL15 is most similar to the MADS box gene FLOWERING LOCUS", " the apex of the inflorescence. This pattern of gene regulation further\ndistinguishes AGL15 from the large group of floral MADS box genes, including AP1 (Mandel et al. 1992b) and FRUITFULL/ [CLS] AGL8 (Mandel and Yanofsky 1995a ; Gu et al. 1998), which are preferentially expressed during the reproductive phase [CLS]  and are induced or upregulated during the transition to\nflowering (Hempel et al. 1997). In terms of regulation, AGL15 is most similar to the MADS box gene FLOWERING LOCUS"]]
["seedev_train_73", [" floral organs, as it does in leaves (reviewed in Telfer and Poethig 1994). In both leaves and floral organs, which are considered homologous organs (reviewed in Poethig 1997), the  [CLS] AGL15 promoter is initially active throughout the young organ primordia [CLS]  but is gradually restricted to the base of the maturing\norgans.\nGiven the patterns of AGL15 promoter activity and mRNA and protein accumulation, we conclude that AGL15 function is"]]
["seedev_train_74", [" floral organs, as it does in leaves (reviewed in Telfer and Poethig 1994). In both leaves and floral organs, which are considered homologous organs (reviewed in Poethig 1997), the  [CLS] AGL15 promoter is initially active throughout the young organ primordia but is gradually restricted to the base of the maturing\norgans [CLS] .\nGiven the patterns of AGL15 promoter activity and mRNA and protein accumulation, we conclude that AGL15 function is most likely associated with the shoot\napical meristems and with young"]]
["seedev_train_75", [" AGL15 protein\napproach those seen in young embryos only during the earliest stages of vegetative growth in the shoot apex of Arabidopsis.\nWith the onset of the reproductive phase,  [CLS] AGL15 promoter activity ceases in the meristematic cells at the apex of the inflorescence [CLS] . This pattern of gene regulation further\ndistinguishes AGL15 from the large group of floral MADS box genes, including AP1 (Mandel et al. 1992b) and FRUITFULL/AGL8 (Mandel and Yanofsky 1995a"]]
["seedev_train_76", [" MADS box gene FLOWERING LOCUS C, which encodes a repressor of flowering and is also downregulated in the transition to flowering (Michaels and Amasino 1999).\nDuring the reproductive phase,  [CLS] AGL15 promoter activity is also associated with young immature cells [CLS] . Cell maturation proceeds in the apical-to-basal direction\nin floral organs, as it does in leaves (reviewed in Telfer and Poethig 1994). In both leaves and floral organs, which are"]]
["seedev_train_77", [" [CLS] AGL15 protein might\naccumulate in these tissues throughout the vegetative phase [CLS] , we conclude that the amounts of nuclear-localized AGL15 protein\napproach those seen in young embryos only during the earliest stages of vegetative growth in the shoot apex of Arabidopsis."]]
["seedev_train_78", [" expressed during the reproductive phase and are induced or upregulated during the transition to\nflowering (Hempel et al. 1997). In terms of regulation, AGL15 is most similar to the  [CLS] MADS box gene FLOWERING LOCUS C [CLS] , which encodes a repressor of flowering and is also downregulated in the transition to flowering (Michaels and Amasino 1999).\nDuring the reproductive phase, AGL15 promoter activity is also associated"]]
["seedev_train_79", [" reproductive phase, AGL15 promoter activity ceases in the meristematic cells at the apex of the inflorescence. This pattern of gene regulation further\ndistinguishes AGL15 from the large group of  [CLS] floral MADS box genes, including AP1 (Mandel et al. 1992b) and FRUITFULL/AGL8 [CLS]  (Mandel and Yanofsky 1995a ; Gu et al. 1998), which are preferentially expressed during the reproductive phase and are induced or upregulated during the transition to\nflowering (Hempel et"]]
["seedev_train_80", [" reproductive phase, AGL15 promoter activity ceases in the meristematic cells at the apex of the inflorescence. This pattern of gene regulation further\ndistinguishes AGL15 from the large group of  [CLS] floral MADS box genes, including AP1 [CLS]  (Mandel et al. 1992b) and FRUITFULL/AGL8 (Mandel and Yanofsky 1995a ; Gu et al. 1998), which are preferentially expressed during the reproductive phase and are induced or upregulated during"]]
["seedev_train_81", [" [CLS] AGL15 protein\napproach those seen in young embryos only during the earliest stages of vegetative growth in the shoot apex of Arabidopsis [CLS] .\nWith the onset of the reproductive phase, AGL15 promoter activity ceases in the meristematic cells at the apex of the inflorescence. This pattern of gene regulation further\ndistinguishes AGL15", " (Cho et\u00a0al., 1999; Honma and Goto, 2001; Ng and Yanofsky, 2001; Pelaz et\u00a0al., 2001). It is interesting to note that the conserved LENETLNRRQxxE motif resides within a region of  [CLS] AGL15 that is necessary and sufficient to allow interaction with SEP3 in yeast [CLS]  (data not shown).\nThere are numerous examples in the literature of protein interactions determining whether a protein acts as a transcriptional activator or repressor. Known transcriptional activators have been", " [CLS] AGL15 binds directly to and represses LEA76, CBF2 and AGL18 in\u00a0planta [CLS] \nIt is becoming increasingly apparent that autoregulatory loops are a common phenomenon in the regulation of MADS-box genes in plants (G\u00f3mez-Mena et\u00a0al., 2005; Honma and Goto, 2000; Zhu and"]]
["seedev_train_82", [" of nuclear-localized AGL15 protein\napproach those seen in young embryos only during the earliest stages of vegetative growth in the shoot apex of Arabidopsis.\nWith the onset of the  [CLS] reproductive phase, AGL15 promoter [CLS]  activity ceases in the meristematic cells at the apex of the inflorescence. This pattern of gene regulation further\ndistinguishes AGL15 from the large group of floral MADS box genes,", " to the MADS box gene FLOWERING LOCUS C, which encodes a repressor of flowering and is also downregulated in the transition to flowering (Michaels and Amasino 1999).\nDuring the  [CLS] reproductive phase, AGL15 promoter [CLS]  activity is also associated with young immature cells. Cell maturation proceeds in the apical-to-basal direction\nin floral organs, as it does in leaves (reviewed in Telfer and Poethig 1994)."]]
["seedev_train_83", [" [CLS] abscisic acid-insensitive (ABI [CLS] ) loci interact to regulate seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible gene expression. We have used the yeast two-hybrid assay to determine whether any of these genetic interactions reflect direct physical interactions. By", " [CLS] ABA insensitive (ABI [CLS] ) loci of Arabidopsis have been shown to interact genetically in regulating processes such as germination and ABA-inducible gene expression. To determine whether ABI4 or ABI5 can physically interact with"]]
["seedev_train_84", [" regulate seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible gene expression. We have used the yeast two-hybrid assay to determine whether any of these genetic interactions reflect direct physical interactions. By this criterion, only  [CLS] ABI3 and ABI5 [CLS]  physically interact with each other, and ABI5 can form homodimers. The B1 domain of ABI3 is essential for this interaction; this is the first specific function ascribed to this", " GAL4-BD fusions with GAL4-AD fusions to full-length ABIs produced a broad range of results (Figure 1). ABI1 and ABI4 did not interact with either ABI4 or ABI5, but both  [CLS] ABI3 and ABI5 strongly interacted with ABI5 [CLS] .\nFigure\u00a01. Tests for pairwise interactions among ABI proteins.\n\u03b2-galactosidase activity of yeast carrying plasmids encoding the GAL4-AD (pGAD) or GAL4-AD fusions to the ABIs indicated and GAL4-BD (pGBD); or"]]
["seedev_train_85", [" regulate seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible gene expression. We have used the yeast two-hybrid assay to determine whether any of these genetic interactions reflect direct physical interactions. By this criterion, only  [CLS] ABI3 and ABI5 [CLS]  physically interact with each other, and ABI5 can form homodimers. The B1 domain of ABI3 is essential for this interaction; this is the first specific function ascribed to this", " with GAL4-AD fusions to full-length ABIs produced a broad range of results (Figure 1). ABI1 and ABI4 did not interact with either ABI4 or ABI5, but both ABI3 and  [CLS] ABI5 strongly interacted with ABI5 [CLS] .\nFigure\u00a01. Tests for pairwise interactions among ABI proteins.\n\u03b2-galactosidase activity of yeast carrying plasmids encoding the GAL4-AD (pGAD) or GAL4-AD fusions to the ABIs indicated and GAL4-BD (pGBD); or"]]
["seedev_train_86", [" ABI5 can form homodimers. The B1 domain of ABI3 is essential for this interaction; this is the first specific function ascribed to this domain of the ABI3/VP1 family. The  [CLS] ABI5 domains required for interaction with ABI3 [CLS]  include two conserved charged domains in the amino-terminal half of the protein. An additional conserved charged domain appears to have intrinsic transcription activation function in this assay. Yeast one-hybrid"]]
["seedev_train_87", [" determine whether any of these genetic interactions reflect direct physical interactions. By this criterion, only ABI3 and ABI5 physically interact with each other, and ABI5 can form homodimers. The  [CLS] B1 domain of ABI3 [CLS]  is essential for this interaction; this is the first specific function ascribed to this domain of the ABI3/VP1 family. The ABI5 domains required for interaction with ABI3 include two"]]
["seedev_train_88", [" determine whether any of these genetic interactions reflect direct physical interactions. By this criterion, only ABI3 and ABI5 physically interact with each other, and ABI5 can form homodimers. The  [CLS] B1 domain of ABI3 is essential for this interaction; this is the first specific function ascribed to this domain of the ABI3/VP1 family [CLS] . The ABI5 domains required for interaction with ABI3 include two conserved charged domains in the amino-terminal half of the protein. An additional conserved charged domain appears to have intrinsic"]]
["seedev_train_89", [" of these genetic interactions reflect direct physical interactions. By this criterion, only ABI3 and ABI5 physically interact with each other, and ABI5 can form homodimers. The B1 domain of  [CLS] ABI3 is essential for this interaction; this is the first specific function ascribed to this domain of the ABI3/VP1 family [CLS] . The ABI5 domains required for interaction with ABI3 include two conserved charged domains in the amino-terminal half of the protein. An additional conserved charged domain appears to have intrinsic"]]
["seedev_train_90", [" [CLS] ABI) loci interact to regulate seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible gene expression [CLS] . We have used the yeast two-hybrid assay to determine whether any of these genetic interactions reflect direct physical interactions. By this criterion, only ABI3 and ABI5 physically interact with", " [CLS] ABI) loci interact to regulate seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible gene expression [CLS] . We have used the yeast two-hybrid assay to determine whether any of these genetic interactions reflect direct physical interactions. By this criterion, only ABI3 and ABI5 physically interact with", " [CLS] ABI) loci of Arabidopsis have been shown to interact genetically in regulating processes such as germination and ABA-inducible gene expression [CLS] . To determine whether ABI4 or ABI5 can physically interact with themselves or any of the other ABIs, we tested pairwise combinations in yeast two-hybrid interaction assays. The assay system"]]
["seedev_train_91", [" An additional conserved charged domain appears to have intrinsic transcription activation function in this assay. Yeast one-hybrid assays with a lacZ reporter gene under control of the late embryogenesis-abundant  [CLS] AtEm6 promoter show that only ABI5 [CLS]  binds directly to this promoter fragment.\n"]]
["seedev_train_92", [" the protein. An additional conserved charged domain appears to have intrinsic transcription activation function in this assay. Yeast one-hybrid assays with a lacZ reporter gene under control of the  [CLS] late embryogenesis-abundant AtEm6 promoter [CLS]  show that only ABI5 binds directly to this promoter fragment.\n"]]
["seedev_train_93", [" with ABI3 include two conserved charged domains in the amino-terminal half of the protein. An additional conserved charged domain appears to have intrinsic transcription activation function in this assay.  [CLS] Yeast one-hybrid assays with a lacZ reporter gene under control of the late embryogenesis-abundant AtEm6 promoter show that only ABI5 [CLS]  binds directly to this promoter fragment.\n"]]
["seedev_train_94", [" with ABI3 include two conserved charged domains in the amino-terminal half of the protein. An additional conserved charged domain appears to have intrinsic transcription activation function in this assay.  [CLS] Yeast one-hybrid assays with a lacZ reporter gene under control of the late embryogenesis-abundant AtEm6 promoter [CLS]  show that only ABI5 binds directly to this promoter fragment.\n"]]
["seedev_train_95", [" [CLS] Arabidopsis thaliana abscisic acid-insensitive (ABI [CLS] ) loci interact to regulate seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible gene expression. We have used the yeast two-hybrid assay to determine whether any of these genetic interactions reflect direct physical interactions. By", " [CLS] ABI) loci of Arabidopsis [CLS]  have been shown to interact genetically in regulating processes such as germination and ABA-inducible gene expression. To determine whether ABI4 or ABI5 can physically interact with themselves or any"]]
["seedev_train_96", [" [CLS] Arabidopsis thaliana abscisic acid-insensitive (ABI) loci interact to regulate seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible gene expression [CLS] . We have used the yeast two-hybrid assay to determine whether any of these genetic interactions reflect direct physical interactions. By this criterion, only ABI3 and ABI5 physically interact with", " [CLS] Arabidopsis thaliana abscisic acid-insensitive (ABI) loci interact to regulate seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible gene expression [CLS] . We have used the yeast two-hybrid assay to determine whether any of these genetic interactions reflect direct physical interactions. By this criterion, only ABI3 and ABI5 physically interact with", " [CLS] Arabidopsis thaliana SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1 (SERK1) is a leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinase (LRR-RLK) involved in the\nacquisition of embryogenic competence and in male sporogenesis [CLS] . To determine the composition of the SERK1 signaling complex\nin vivo, we generated plants expressing the SERK1 protein fused to cyan fluorescent protein under SERK1 promoter control.\nThe membrane", " [CLS] Arabidopsis thaliana SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1 (SERK1) is a leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinase (LRR-RLK) involved in the\nacquisition of embryogenic competence [CLS]  and in male sporogenesis. To determine the composition of the SERK1 signaling complex\nin vivo, we generated plants expressing the SERK1 protein fused to cyan fluorescent protein under SERK1", " [CLS] Arabidopsis thaliana CLAVATA1 (CLV1), BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE1 (BRI1), ERECTA, rice (Oryza sativa) Xa21, HAESA-RLK5, and FLS2 genes were shown to function in shoot meristem maintenance, hormone perception [CLS] , organ elongation,\ndisease resistance, abscission, and flagellin signaling, respectively (reviewed in Torii, 2004). Extensive genetic and biochemical studies have been undertaken to identify additional components of different signaling\npathways.", " [CLS] Arabidopsis thaliana CLAVATA1 (CLV1), BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE1 (BRI1), ERECTA, rice (Oryza sativa) Xa21, HAESA-RLK5, and FLS2 genes were shown to function in shoot meristem maintenance [CLS] , hormone perception, organ elongation,\ndisease resistance, abscission, and flagellin signaling, respectively (reviewed in Torii, 2004). Extensive genetic and biochemical studies have been undertaken to identify additional components of different", " [CLS] Arabidopsis thaliana CLAVATA1 (CLV1), BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE1 (BRI1), ERECTA, rice (Oryza sativa) Xa21, HAESA-RLK5, and FLS2 genes were shown to function in shoot meristem maintenance, hormone perception, organ elongation [CLS] ,\ndisease resistance, abscission, and flagellin signaling, respectively (reviewed in Torii, 2004). Extensive genetic and biochemical studies have been undertaken to identify additional components of different signaling\npathways. For example,"]]
["seedev_train_97", [" for pairwise interactions among ABI proteins.\n\u03b2-galactosidase activity of yeast carrying plasmids encoding the GAL4-AD (pGAD) or GAL4-AD fusions to the ABIs indicated and GAL4-BD (pGBD); or (a) a  [CLS] GAL4-BD-ABI4 fusion (BD-ABI4 [CLS] ); or (b) a GAL4-BD-ABI5 (BD-ABI5) fusion.\n"]]
["seedev_train_98", ["\n\u03b2-galactosidase activity of yeast carrying plasmids encoding the GAL4-AD (pGAD) or GAL4-AD fusions to the ABIs indicated and GAL4-BD (pGBD); or (a) a GAL4-BD-ABI4 fusion (BD-ABI4); or (b) a  [CLS] GAL4-BD-ABI5 (BD-ABI5 [CLS] ) fusion.\n"]]
["seedev_train_99", [" that produced by the vector control) (Figure 1b). Combination of these GAL4-BD fusions with GAL4-AD fusions to full-length ABIs produced a broad range of results (Figure 1). ABI1 and  [CLS] ABI4 did not interact with either ABI4 [CLS]  or ABI5, but both ABI3 and ABI5 strongly interacted with ABI5.\nFigure\u00a01. Tests for pairwise interactions among ABI proteins.\n\u03b2-galactosidase activity of yeast carrying plasmids encoding the GAL4-AD (pGAD)", " that produced by the vector control) (Figure 1b). Combination of these GAL4-BD fusions with GAL4-AD fusions to full-length ABIs produced a broad range of results (Figure 1). ABI1 and  [CLS] ABI4 did not interact with either ABI4 or ABI5 [CLS] , but both ABI3 and ABI5 strongly interacted with ABI5.\nFigure\u00a01. Tests for pairwise interactions among ABI proteins.\n\u03b2-galactosidase activity of yeast carrying plasmids encoding the GAL4-AD (pGAD) or GAL4-AD"]]
["seedev_train_100", [" (only fourfold that produced by the vector control) (Figure 1b). Combination of these GAL4-BD fusions with GAL4-AD fusions to full-length ABIs produced a broad range of results (Figure 1).  [CLS] ABI1 and ABI4 did not interact with either ABI4 or ABI5 [CLS] , but both ABI3 and ABI5 strongly interacted with ABI5.\nFigure\u00a01. Tests for pairwise interactions among ABI proteins.\n\u03b2-galactosidase activity of yeast carrying plasmids encoding the GAL4-AD (pGAD) or GAL4-AD", " (only fourfold that produced by the vector control) (Figure 1b). Combination of these GAL4-BD fusions with GAL4-AD fusions to full-length ABIs produced a broad range of results (Figure 1).  [CLS] ABI1 and ABI4 did not interact with either ABI4 [CLS]  or ABI5, but both ABI3 and ABI5 strongly interacted with ABI5.\nFigure\u00a01. Tests for pairwise interactions among ABI proteins.\n\u03b2-galactosidase activity of yeast carrying plasmids encoding the GAL4-AD (pGAD)"]]
["seedev_train_101", [" for pairwise interactions among ABI proteins.\n\u03b2-galactosidase activity of yeast carrying plasmids encoding the GAL4-AD (pGAD) or GAL4-AD fusions to the ABIs indicated and GAL4-BD (pGBD); or (a) a  [CLS] GAL4-BD-ABI4 [CLS]  fusion (BD-ABI4); or (b) a GAL4-BD-ABI5 (BD-ABI5) fusion.\n", " fusion (S\u00f6derman et\u00a0al., 2000). Although the truncation reduces target gene expression roughly threefold, the remaining basal level of expression is still approximately tenfold higher than that produced by the  [CLS] GAL4-BD [CLS]  alone (Figure 1a). The BD-ABI5 construct encoded all but the first eight amino acids of ABI5, thus including all conserved domains, but produced a much lower basal expression of", " for pairwise interactions among ABI proteins.\n\u03b2-galactosidase activity of yeast carrying plasmids encoding the GAL4-AD (pGAD) or GAL4-AD fusions to the ABIs indicated and GAL4-BD (pGBD); or (a) a  [CLS] GAL4-BD [CLS] -ABI4 fusion (BD-ABI4); or (b) a GAL4-BD-ABI5 (BD-ABI5) fusion.\n", "\n\u03b2-galactosidase activity of yeast carrying plasmids encoding the GAL4-AD (pGAD) or GAL4-AD fusions to the ABIs indicated and GAL4-BD (pGBD); or (a) a GAL4-BD-ABI4 fusion (BD-ABI4); or (b) a  [CLS] GAL4-BD [CLS] -ABI5 (BD-ABI5) fusion.\n", "\n\u03b2-galactosidase activity of yeast carrying plasmids encoding the GAL4-AD (pGAD) or GAL4-AD fusions to the ABIs indicated and GAL4-BD (pGBD); or (a) a GAL4-BD-ABI4 fusion (BD-ABI4); or (b) a  [CLS] GAL4-BD-ABI5 [CLS]  (BD-ABI5) fusion.\n", " thus including all conserved domains, but produced a much lower basal expression of the reporter genes (only fourfold that produced by the vector control) (Figure 1b). Combination of these  [CLS] GAL4-BD [CLS]  fusions with GAL4-AD fusions to full-length ABIs produced a broad range of results (Figure 1). ABI1 and ABI4 did not interact with either ABI4 or ABI5, but both ABI3", " interacted with ABI5.\nFigure\u00a01. Tests for pairwise interactions among ABI proteins.\n\u03b2-galactosidase activity of yeast carrying plasmids encoding the GAL4-AD (pGAD) or GAL4-AD fusions to the ABIs indicated and  [CLS] GAL4-BD [CLS]  (pGBD); or (a) a GAL4-BD-ABI4 fusion (BD-ABI4); or (b) a GAL4-BD-ABI5 (BD-ABI5) fusion.\n"]]
["seedev_train_102", [" ABI protein fusions would bring the GAL4 domains of the fusions into close enough proximity to transactivate a \u03b2-galactosidase gene controlled by a GAL4-responsive promoter (James et\u00a0al., 1996).\nThe  [CLS] GAL4-binding domain [CLS]  (BD)-ABI4 construct encoded a slightly truncated form of ABI4 (amino acids 3\u2013287) because a full-length ABI4 fusion provides very strong transcription-activation function in the absence of any activation domain", " ABI protein fusions would bring the GAL4 domains of the fusions into close enough proximity to transactivate a \u03b2-galactosidase gene controlled by a GAL4-responsive promoter (James et\u00a0al., 1996).\nThe  [CLS] GAL4-binding domain (BD)-ABI4 [CLS]  construct encoded a slightly truncated form of ABI4 (amino acids 3\u2013287) because a full-length ABI4 fusion provides very strong transcription-activation function in the absence of any activation domain (AD)"]]
["seedev_train_103", [" either ABI4 or ABI5, but both ABI3 and ABI5 strongly interacted with ABI5.\nFigure\u00a01. Tests for pairwise interactions among ABI proteins.\n\u03b2-galactosidase activity of yeast carrying plasmids encoding the  [CLS] GAL4-AD [CLS]  (pGAD) or GAL4-AD fusions to the ABIs indicated and GAL4-BD (pGBD); or (a) a GAL4-BD-ABI4 fusion (BD-ABI4); or (b) a GAL4-BD-ABI5 (BD-ABI5) fusion.\n", " conserved domains, but produced a much lower basal expression of the reporter genes (only fourfold that produced by the vector control) (Figure 1b). Combination of these GAL4-BD fusions with  [CLS] GAL4-AD [CLS]  fusions to full-length ABIs produced a broad range of results (Figure 1). ABI1 and ABI4 did not interact with either ABI4 or ABI5, but both ABI3 and ABI5 strongly", " ABI5, but both ABI3 and ABI5 strongly interacted with ABI5.\nFigure\u00a01. Tests for pairwise interactions among ABI proteins.\n\u03b2-galactosidase activity of yeast carrying plasmids encoding the GAL4-AD (pGAD) or  [CLS] GAL4-AD [CLS]  fusions to the ABIs indicated and GAL4-BD (pGBD); or (a) a GAL4-BD-ABI4 fusion (BD-ABI4); or (b) a GAL4-BD-ABI5 (BD-ABI5) fusion.\n"]]
["seedev_train_104", [" [CLS] ABI5 can physically interact with themselves or any of the other ABIs [CLS] , we tested pairwise combinations in yeast two-hybrid interaction assays. The assay system was comprised of fusions between the ABI proteins and either the DNA-binding domain or the transcription-activation domain"]]
["seedev_train_105", [" [CLS] ABI4 or ABI5 can physically interact with themselves or any of the other ABIs [CLS] , we tested pairwise combinations in yeast two-hybrid interaction assays. The assay system was comprised of fusions between the ABI proteins and either the DNA-binding domain or the transcription-activation domain"]]
["seedev_train_106", [" [CLS] ABI) loci of Arabidopsis have been shown to interact genetically in regulating processes such as germination [CLS]  and ABA-inducible gene expression. To determine whether ABI4 or ABI5 can physically interact with themselves or any of the other ABIs, we tested pairwise combinations in yeast two-hybrid interaction"]]
["seedev_train_107", [" interacted with ABI5.\nFigure\u00a01. Tests for pairwise interactions among ABI proteins.\n\u03b2-galactosidase activity of yeast carrying plasmids encoding the GAL4-AD (pGAD) or GAL4-AD fusions to the ABIs indicated and  [CLS] GAL4-BD (pGBD [CLS] ); or (a) a GAL4-BD-ABI4 fusion (BD-ABI4); or (b) a GAL4-BD-ABI5 (BD-ABI5) fusion.\n"]]
["seedev_train_108", [" either ABI4 or ABI5, but both ABI3 and ABI5 strongly interacted with ABI5.\nFigure\u00a01. Tests for pairwise interactions among ABI proteins.\n\u03b2-galactosidase activity of yeast carrying plasmids encoding the  [CLS] GAL4-AD (pGAD [CLS] ) or GAL4-AD fusions to the ABIs indicated and GAL4-BD (pGBD); or (a) a GAL4-BD-ABI4 fusion (BD-ABI4); or (b) a GAL4-BD-ABI5 (BD-ABI5) fusion.\n"]]
["seedev_train_109", [" [CLS] Arabidopsis have been shown to interact genetically in regulating processes such as germination and ABA-inducible gene expression [CLS] . To determine whether ABI4 or ABI5 can physically interact with themselves or any of the other ABIs, we tested pairwise combinations in yeast two-hybrid interaction assays. The assay system", " [CLS] Arabidopsis seed coat epidermis undergoes a complex process of differentiation [CLS]  that includes the biosynthesis and secretion\nof large quantities of pectinaceous mucilage, cytoplasmic rearrangement, and secondary cell wall biosynthesis. Mutations in\nMUM4 (MUCILAGE-MODIFIED4) lead to a decrease in seed", " [CLS] Arabidopsis seed coat epidermis undergoes a complex process of differentiation that includes the biosynthesis and secretion\nof large quantities of pectinaceous mucilage, cytoplasmic rearrangement [CLS] , and secondary cell wall biosynthesis. Mutations in\nMUM4 (MUCILAGE-MODIFIED4) lead to a decrease in seed coat mucilage and incomplete cytoplasmic rearrangement. We show that MUM4 encodes a putative NDP-l-rhamnose", " domain with similarity to the bacterial dTDP-d-Glc 4,6-dehydratases but also a C-terminal domain with some similarity to 4-reductases (this study; Reiter and Vanzin, 2001). There is a precedent in  [CLS] Arabidopsis for a bifunctional 3,5 epimerase, 4-reductase in the synthesis of GDP-l-Fuc from GDP-d-Man [CLS]  (GER1, GER2) (Bonin and Reiter, 2000). Therefore, based on sequence analysis, it is attractive to postulate a single, multifunctional protein acting in the conversion\nof NDP-d-Glc to NDP-l-Rha in", " [CLS] Arabidopsis LEAFY COTYLEDON1 (LEC1) gene is required for the specification of cotyledon identity [CLS]  and the completion of embryo maturation. We isolated the LEC1 gene and showed that it functions at an early developmental stage to maintain embryonic cell fate. The LEC1 gene"]]
["seedev_train_110", [" [CLS] ABI4 and any other ABIs [CLS] . Therefore we tested whether such interactions might either be masked by the high level of basal expression, or require formation of a ternary complex. Although further truncations of ABI4"]]
["seedev_train_111", [" plants that is characteristic of\nseveral transcription factors. We showed that LEC2 RNA\naccumulates primarily during seed development, consistent with our\nfinding that LEC2 shares greatest similarity with the  [CLS] B3 domain\ntranscription factors that act primarily in developing seeds,\nVIVIPAROUS1/ABA INSENSITIVE3 [CLS]  and FUSCA3. Ectopic, postembryonic\nexpression of LEC2 in transgenic plants induces the\nformation of somatic embryos and other organ-like structures and often\nconfers embryonic characteristics to seedlings. Together, these"]]
["seedev_train_112", [" quiescent metabolically. Although many aspects of embryogenesis\nhave been characterized extensively, little is known at a mechanistic\nlevel of the processes that initiate embryo development.\nThe Arabidopsis LEAFY COTYLEDON ( [CLS] LEC) genes,\nLEC1, LEC2 [CLS] , and FUSCA3 (FUS3), play\nkey roles in controlling embryo development (7). Unlike most other\nembryonic regulators that function during specific stages of\nembryogenesis (8\u201311), LEC genes are unique in", " [CLS] B3 domain factors, LEAFY COTYLEDON 2 (LEC2 [CLS] ), FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3) of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Interactions of these genes result in temporal progression of overlapping B3 gene expression culminating in maturation\nand", " (Zea mays) ortholog VP1 develop normally, but have dramatically altered ABA-dependent gene expression in vegetative tissues (Parcy et al., 1994; Suzuki et al., 2001).\nA major function of the  [CLS] LEC2, FUS3, and ABI3 B3 transcription factors [CLS]  is activation of genes involved in accumulation of storage protein and lipid reserves in the embryo\nduring seed maturation. Activation of downstream genes is mediated by specific binding of", " a network of transcription factors that include the LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1) and LEC1-LIKE (L1L) genes belonging to the HAP3 family CCAAT-binding factors and a subgroup of the plant-specific  [CLS] B3 domain protein family composed\nof the LEC2 [CLS] , FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC ACID (ABA)-INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3) genes (Giraudat et al., 1992; Lotan et al., 1998; Luerssen et al., 1998; Stone et al., 2001; Kwong et al., 2003)."]]
["seedev_train_113", ["\ndomain, a DNA-binding motif unique to plants that is characteristic of\nseveral transcription factors. We showed that LEC2 RNA\naccumulates primarily during seed development, consistent with our\nfinding that  [CLS] LEC2 shares greatest similarity with the B3 domain\ntranscription factors [CLS]  that act primarily in developing seeds,\nVIVIPAROUS1/ABA INSENSITIVE3 and FUSCA3. Ectopic, postembryonic\nexpression of LEC2 in transgenic plants induces the\nformation of somatic embryos and other organ-like structures and", " normal seed development. Although they all play roles in\nseed development, their specific functions have diverged. ABI3 is a\ntranscription factor that operates primarily during the maturation\nphase, whereas  [CLS] LEC2 and FUS3 are LEAFY COTYLEDON [CLS]  proteins required for\nprocesses during both the morphogenesis and maturation phases.\n"]]
["seedev_train_114", [" quiescent metabolically. Although many aspects of embryogenesis\nhave been characterized extensively, little is known at a mechanistic\nlevel of the processes that initiate embryo development.\nThe Arabidopsis LEAFY COTYLEDON ( [CLS] LEC) genes,\nLEC1 [CLS] , LEC2, and FUSCA3 (FUS3), play\nkey roles in controlling embryo development (7). Unlike most other\nembryonic regulators that function during specific stages of\nembryogenesis (8\u201311), LEC genes are unique", " for chromatin-mediated repression in conjunction with the PKL-related CHD3\nchromatin-remodeling factors.\nEmbryo development in plants is regulated by a network of transcription factors that include the LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 ( [CLS] LEC1) and LEC1-LIKE (L1L) genes belonging to the HAP3 family [CLS]  CCAAT-binding factors and a subgroup of the plant-specific B3 domain protein family composed\nof the LEC2, FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC ACID (ABA)-INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3) genes (Giraudat et al., 1992;"]]
["seedev_train_115", [" candidates as regulators that coordinate the morphogenesis and\nmaturation phases.\nIdentification and analysis of two LEC genes confirmed their\nregulatory role in embryogenesis and provided insight into their\nfunctions.  [CLS] LEC1 shares extensive sequence similarity with the HAP3\nsubunit of CCAAT-binding transcription factor [CLS] , implicating LEC1 as a\ntranscriptional regulator (12). Ectopic expression of LEC1\nconfers embryonic characteristics to seedlings and results in the\nformation of embryo-like structures on the surfaces of leaves,"]]
["seedev_train_116", [" quiescent metabolically. Although many aspects of embryogenesis\nhave been characterized extensively, little is known at a mechanistic\nlevel of the processes that initiate embryo development.\nThe Arabidopsis LEAFY COTYLEDON ( [CLS] LEC) genes,\nLEC1, LEC2, and FUSCA3 (FUS3 [CLS] ), play\nkey roles in controlling embryo development (7). Unlike most other\nembryonic regulators that function during specific stages of\nembryogenesis (8\u201311), LEC genes are unique in that they are", " a network of transcription factors that include the LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1) and LEC1-LIKE (L1L) genes belonging to the HAP3 family CCAAT-binding factors and a subgroup of the plant-specific  [CLS] B3 domain protein family composed\nof the LEC2, FUSCA3 (FUS3 [CLS] ), and ABSCISIC ACID (ABA)-INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3) genes (Giraudat et al., 1992; Lotan et al., 1998; Luerssen et al., 1998; Stone et al., 2001; Kwong et al., 2003).\nA series", " [CLS] B3 domain factors, LEAFY COTYLEDON 2 (LEC2), FUSCA3 (FUS3 [CLS] ), and ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3) of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Interactions of these genes result in temporal progression of overlapping B3 gene expression culminating in maturation\nand desiccation of", " mays) ortholog VP1 develop normally, but have dramatically altered ABA-dependent gene expression in vegetative tissues (Parcy et al., 1994; Suzuki et al., 2001).\nA major function of the LEC2,  [CLS] FUS3, and ABI3 B3 transcription factors [CLS]  is activation of genes involved in accumulation of storage protein and lipid reserves in the embryo\nduring seed maturation. Activation of downstream genes is mediated by specific binding of"]]
["seedev_train_117", [" plants that is characteristic of\nseveral transcription factors. We showed that LEC2 RNA\naccumulates primarily during seed development, consistent with our\nfinding that LEC2 shares greatest similarity with the  [CLS] B3 domain\ntranscription factors that act primarily in developing seeds,\nVIVIPAROUS1/ABA INSENSITIVE3 and FUSCA3 [CLS] . Ectopic, postembryonic\nexpression of LEC2 in transgenic plants induces the\nformation of somatic embryos and other organ-like structures and often\nconfers embryonic characteristics to seedlings. Together, these results\nsuggest"]]
["seedev_train_118", [" plants that is characteristic of\nseveral transcription factors. We showed that LEC2 RNA\naccumulates primarily during seed development, consistent with our\nfinding that LEC2 shares greatest similarity with the  [CLS] B3 domain\ntranscription factors that act primarily in developing seeds,\nVIVIPAROUS1 [CLS] /ABA INSENSITIVE3 and FUSCA3. Ectopic, postembryonic\nexpression of LEC2 in transgenic plants induces the\nformation of somatic embryos and other organ-like structures and often\nconfers embryonic characteristics to seedlings. Together,"]]
["seedev_train_119", [" many maturation-specific genes (13\u201317). Consistent\nwith the finding that conditions that promote maturation suppress\ngermination (6), lec mutant embryos prematurely activate the\npostgermination program (13, 15, 16, 18). Thus,  [CLS] LEC genes\nplay a central role in controlling many aspects of embryogenesis [CLS] , and\nthey are candidates as regulators that coordinate the morphogenesis and\nmaturation phases.\nIdentification and analysis of two LEC genes confirmed their\nregulatory role in embryogenesis and provided insight", " quiescent metabolically. Although many aspects of embryogenesis\nhave been characterized extensively, little is known at a mechanistic\nlevel of the processes that initiate embryo development.\nThe Arabidopsis LEAFY COTYLEDON ( [CLS] LEC) genes,\nLEC1, LEC2, and FUSCA3 (FUS3), play\nkey roles in controlling embryo development [CLS]  (7). Unlike most other\nembryonic regulators that function during specific stages of\nembryogenesis (8\u201311), LEC genes are unique in that they are\nrequired for normal development during both the", " many maturation-specific genes (13\u201317). Consistent\nwith the finding that conditions that promote maturation suppress\ngermination (6), lec mutant embryos prematurely activate the\npostgermination program (13, 15, 16, 18). Thus,  [CLS] LEC genes\nplay a central role in controlling many aspects of embryogenesis, and\nthey are candidates as regulators that coordinate the morphogenesis [CLS]  and\nmaturation phases.\nIdentification and analysis of two LEC genes confirmed their\nregulatory role in embryogenesis and provided insight into their\nfunctions. LEC1 shares extensive sequence similarity with the", " function during specific stages of\nembryogenesis (8\u201311), LEC genes are unique in that they are\nrequired for normal development during both the morphogenesis and\nmaturation phases. Early in embryogenesis,  [CLS] LEC genes are\nrequired to specify suspensor cell fate and cotyledon identity [CLS] \n(12\u201316). Late in embryogenesis, LEC genes are needed during\nthe maturation phase for the acquisition of desiccation tolerance and\nthe expression of many maturation-specific genes (13\u201317). Consistent\nwith the", " genes\nplay a central role in controlling many aspects of embryogenesis, and\nthey are candidates as regulators that coordinate the morphogenesis and\nmaturation phases.\nIdentification and analysis of two  [CLS] LEC genes confirmed their\nregulatory role in embryogenesis [CLS]  and provided insight into their\nfunctions. LEC1 shares extensive sequence similarity with the HAP3\nsubunit of CCAAT-binding transcription factor, implicating LEC1 as a\ntranscriptional regulator (12). Ectopic expression of", " many maturation-specific genes (13\u201317). Consistent\nwith the finding that conditions that promote maturation suppress\ngermination (6), lec mutant embryos prematurely activate the\npostgermination program (13, 15, 16, 18). Thus,  [CLS] LEC genes\nplay a central role in controlling many aspects of embryogenesis, and\nthey are candidates as regulators that coordinate the morphogenesis and\nmaturation phases [CLS] .\nIdentification and analysis of two LEC genes confirmed their\nregulatory role in embryogenesis and provided insight into their\nfunctions. LEC1 shares extensive sequence similarity with the HAP3\nsubunit of"]]
["seedev_train_120", [" in the\nformation of embryo-like structures on the surfaces of leaves,\nsuggesting that the gene plays a role in conferring embryogenic\ncompetence to cells (12). Thus, we hypothesized that  [CLS] LEC1 establishes a\ncellular environment that promotes embryo development [CLS]  and that this\nenvironment coordinates the morphogenesis and maturation phases.\nFUS3 also encodes a regulatory protein: a B3 domain\ntranscription factor that accumulates primarily during seed development\n(19). Transient", "\nin endosperm tissue. Ectopic postembryonic expression of the LEC1\ngene in vegetative cells induces the expression of embryo-specific\ngenes and initiates formation of embryo-like structures. Our results\nsuggest that  [CLS] LEC1 is an important regulator of embryo development [CLS]  that\nactivates the transcription of genes required for both embryo\nmorphogenesis and cellular differentiation.prs.rt(\"abs_end\");\n"]]
["seedev_train_121", [" primarily during seed development, consistent with our\nfinding that LEC2 shares greatest similarity with the B3 domain\ntranscription factors that act primarily in developing seeds,\nVIVIPAROUS1/ABA INSENSITIVE3 and FUSCA3.  [CLS] Ectopic, postembryonic\nexpression of LEC2 in transgenic plants induces the\nformation of somatic embryos and other organ-like structures and often\nconfers embryonic characteristics to seedlings [CLS] . Together, these results\nsuggest that LEC2 is a transcriptional regulator that establishes a\ncellular environment sufficient to initiate embryo development.\nEmbryogenesis in flowering\nplants begins with the double fertilization", " primarily during seed development, consistent with our\nfinding that LEC2 shares greatest similarity with the B3 domain\ntranscription factors that act primarily in developing seeds,\nVIVIPAROUS1/ABA INSENSITIVE3 and FUSCA3.  [CLS] Ectopic, postembryonic\nexpression of LEC2 in transgenic plants induces the\nformation of somatic embryos and other organ-like structures [CLS]  and often\nconfers embryonic characteristics to seedlings. Together, these results\nsuggest that LEC2 is a transcriptional regulator that establishes a\ncellular environment sufficient to initiate embryo development.\nEmbryogenesis in", " primarily during seed development, consistent with our\nfinding that LEC2 shares greatest similarity with the B3 domain\ntranscription factors that act primarily in developing seeds,\nVIVIPAROUS1/ABA INSENSITIVE3 and FUSCA3.  [CLS] Ectopic, postembryonic\nexpression of LEC2 in transgenic plants induces the\nformation of somatic embryos [CLS]  and other organ-like structures and often\nconfers embryonic characteristics to seedlings. Together, these results\nsuggest that LEC2 is a transcriptional regulator that establishes a\ncellular environment sufficient to initiate"]]
["seedev_train_122", ["\nof polarity as a shoot\u2013root axis, specification of morphological\ndomains within the embryo, and formation of embryonic tissue and organ\nsystems (2\u20134). The morphogenesis phase is followed by a  [CLS] period of\nmaturation in which processes critical for seed formation occur (5, 6).\nDuring this late phase, reserves such as storage proteins [CLS]  and lipids\nare synthesized at high rates and accumulate in the seed. It is also\nduring the maturation phase that the embryo acquires the ability to\nwithstand desiccation at", "\nof polarity as a shoot\u2013root axis, specification of morphological\ndomains within the embryo, and formation of embryonic tissue and organ\nsystems (2\u20134). The morphogenesis phase is followed by a  [CLS] period of\nmaturation in which processes critical for seed formation occur (5, 6).\nDuring this late phase, reserves such as storage proteins and lipids [CLS] \nare synthesized at high rates and accumulate in the seed. It is also\nduring the maturation phase that the embryo acquires the ability to\nwithstand desiccation at the final"]]
["seedev_train_123", ["\nthe maturation phase for the acquisition of desiccation tolerance and\nthe expression of many maturation-specific genes (13\u201317). Consistent\nwith the finding that conditions that promote maturation suppress\ngermination (6),  [CLS] lec mutant embryos prematurely activate the\npostgermination program [CLS]  (13, 15, 16, 18). Thus, LEC genes\nplay a central role in controlling many aspects of embryogenesis, and\nthey are candidates as regulators that coordinate the morphogenesis and\nmaturation"]]
["seedev_train_124", [" function during specific stages of\nembryogenesis (8\u201311), LEC genes are unique in that they are\nrequired for normal development during both the morphogenesis and\nmaturation phases. Early in embryogenesis,  [CLS] LEC genes are\nrequired to specify suspensor cell fate [CLS]  and cotyledon identity\n(12\u201316). Late in embryogenesis, LEC genes are needed during\nthe maturation phase for the acquisition of desiccation tolerance and\nthe expression of many maturation-specific genes (13\u201317).", " for normal development during both the morphogenesis and\nmaturation phases. Early in embryogenesis, LEC genes are\nrequired to specify suspensor cell fate and cotyledon identity\n(12\u201316). Late in embryogenesis,  [CLS] LEC genes are needed during\nthe maturation phase for the acquisition of desiccation tolerance [CLS]  and\nthe expression of many maturation-specific genes (13\u201317). Consistent\nwith the finding that conditions that promote maturation suppress\ngermination (6), lec mutant embryos prematurely activate the\npostgermination program (13,", " COTYLEDON (LEC) genes,\nLEC1, LEC2, and FUSCA3 (FUS3), play\nkey roles in controlling embryo development (7). Unlike most other\nembryonic regulators that function during specific stages of\nembryogenesis (8\u201311),  [CLS] LEC genes are unique in that they are\nrequired for normal development [CLS]  during both the morphogenesis and\nmaturation phases. Early in embryogenesis, LEC genes are\nrequired to specify suspensor cell fate and cotyledon identity\n(12\u201316). Late in embryogenesis, LEC genes are"]]
["seedev_train_125", [" and provided insight into their\nfunctions. LEC1 shares extensive sequence similarity with the HAP3\nsubunit of CCAAT-binding transcription factor, implicating LEC1 as a\ntranscriptional regulator (12). Ectopic expression of  [CLS] LEC1\nconfers embryonic characteristics to seedlings and results in the\nformation of embryo-like structures on the surfaces of leaves,\nsuggesting that the gene plays a role in conferring embryogenic\ncompetence to cells [CLS]  (12). Thus, we hypothesized that LEC1 establishes a\ncellular environment that promotes embryo development and that this\nenvironment coordinates the morphogenesis and maturation phases.\nFUS3 also encodes a regulatory", " interpretation is\nconsistent with analyses showing that lec1 lec2 double\nmutants arrest at an earlier embryonic stage than either single mutant,\nwhich indicates partial genetic redundancy (12, 15).\nAlthough  [CLS] LEC1 and LEC2 are each sufficient to\ninduce embryogenic competence in somatic cells [CLS] , they have similar but\nnot identical functions. Mutations in each gene result in distinct\nphenotypes, and the double mutant displays a synergistic phenotype (12,\n15, 16). Furthermore, the vast", " least in part,\nmediates somatic embryo formation in pkl mutants. Given our\nresults, we hypothesize that LEC2 may also be derepressed in\npkl mutants.\nThe ability of LEC2 and  [CLS] LEC1 to induce somatic\nembryogenesis suggests a role for the genes in the establishment of\nembryogenic competence [CLS] . Somatic plant cells generally must be induced\nto become competent for somatic embryogenesis (42\u201344). Embryogenic\ncompetence is often induced by culturing cells with the hormone auxin\nand, sometimes cytokinin,", " least in part,\nmediates somatic embryo formation in pkl mutants. Given our\nresults, we hypothesize that LEC2 may also be derepressed in\npkl mutants.\nThe ability of LEC2 and  [CLS] LEC1 to induce somatic\nembryogenesis [CLS]  suggests a role for the genes in the establishment of\nembryogenic competence. Somatic plant cells generally must be induced\nto become competent for somatic embryogenesis (42\u201344). Embryogenic\ncompetence is", " [CLS] LEC1) gene is required for the specification of cotyledon identity [CLS]  and the completion of embryo maturation. We isolated the LEC1 gene and showed that it functions at an early developmental stage to maintain embryonic cell fate. The LEC1 gene", " [CLS] LEC1 gene and showed that it functions at an early developmental stage to maintain embryonic cell fate [CLS] . The LEC1 gene encodes a transcription factor homolog, the CCAAT box\u2013binding factor HAP3 subunit. LEC1\nRNA accumulates only during seed development in embryo cell types and\nin endosperm tissue."]]
["seedev_train_126", [" [CLS] LEC2) gene is a central embryonic regulator that serves\ncritical roles both early and late during embryo development [CLS] .\nLEC2 is required for the maintenance of suspensor\nmorphology, specification of cotyledon identity, progression through\nthe maturation phase, and suppression of premature germination. We\ncloned the LEC2 gene on", " many aspects of embryogenesis\nhave been characterized extensively, little is known at a mechanistic\nlevel of the processes that initiate embryo development.\nThe Arabidopsis LEAFY COTYLEDON (LEC) genes,\nLEC1,  [CLS] LEC2, and FUSCA3 (FUS3), play\nkey roles in controlling embryo development [CLS]  (7). Unlike most other\nembryonic regulators that function during specific stages of\nembryogenesis (8\u201311), LEC genes are unique in that they are\nrequired for normal development during both the", " [CLS] LEC2) gene is a central embryonic regulator that serves\ncritical roles both early and late during embryo development [CLS] .\nLEC2 is required for the maintenance of suspensor\nmorphology, specification of cotyledon identity, progression through\nthe maturation phase, and suppression of premature germination. We\ncloned the LEC2 gene on", " including the early acting LEC1 and L1L genes. We suggest that VAL targets Sph/RY-containing genes in the network for chromatin-mediated repression in conjunction with the PKL-related CHD3\nchromatin-remodeling factors.\n [CLS] Embryo development in plants is regulated by a network of transcription factors that include the LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1) and LEC1-LIKE (L1L) genes belonging to the HAP3 family CCAAT-binding factors and a subgroup of the plant-specific B3 domain protein family composed\nof the LEC2 [CLS] , FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC ACID (ABA)-INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3) genes (Giraudat et al., 1992; Lotan et al., 1998; Luerssen et al., 1998; Stone et al., 2001; Kwong et al., 2003).", " [CLS] embryo development is regulated by a network of transcription factors that include LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1), LEC1-LIKE (L1L), and B3 domain factors, LEAFY COTYLEDON 2 (LEC2 [CLS] ), FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3) of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Interactions of these genes result in temporal progression of overlapping B3 gene expression culminating in maturation\nand"]]
["seedev_train_127", [" the\nperipheral layer of the endosperm remains in the mature seed.\nDevelopment of the zygote into the mature embryo can be divided\nconceptually into two distinct phases. During the  [CLS] early morphogenesis\nphase, the basic body plan of the plant is established with expression\nof polarity as a shoot\u2013root axis, specification of morphological\ndomains within the embryo [CLS] , and formation of embryonic tissue and organ\nsystems (2\u20134). The morphogenesis phase is followed by a period of\nmaturation in which processes critical for seed formation occur (5, 6).", " the\nperipheral layer of the endosperm remains in the mature seed.\nDevelopment of the zygote into the mature embryo can be divided\nconceptually into two distinct phases. During the  [CLS] early morphogenesis\nphase, the basic body plan of the plant is established with expression\nof polarity as a shoot\u2013root axis, specification of morphological\ndomains within the embryo, and formation of embryonic tissue and organ\nsystems [CLS]  (2\u20134). The morphogenesis phase is followed by a period of\nmaturation in which processes critical for seed formation occur (5, 6).\nDuring this late phase, reserves such as storage", " the\nperipheral layer of the endosperm remains in the mature seed.\nDevelopment of the zygote into the mature embryo can be divided\nconceptually into two distinct phases. During the  [CLS] early morphogenesis\nphase, the basic body plan of the plant is established with expression\nof polarity as a shoot\u2013root axis, specification of morphological\ndomains within the embryo, and formation of embryonic tissue [CLS]  and organ\nsystems (2\u20134). The morphogenesis phase is followed by a period of\nmaturation in which processes critical for seed formation occur (5, 6).\nDuring this late phase, reserves", " the\nperipheral layer of the endosperm remains in the mature seed.\nDevelopment of the zygote into the mature embryo can be divided\nconceptually into two distinct phases. During the  [CLS] early morphogenesis\nphase, the basic body plan of the plant is established with expression\nof polarity as a shoot\u2013root axis [CLS] , specification of morphological\ndomains within the embryo, and formation of embryonic tissue and organ\nsystems (2\u20134). The morphogenesis phase is followed by a period of\nmaturation in which processes"]]
["seedev_train_128", [" reserves such as storage proteins and lipids\nare synthesized at high rates and accumulate in the seed. It is also\nduring the maturation phase that the embryo acquires the  [CLS] ability to\nwithstand desiccation at the final stage of seed development [CLS] . At the\nend of embryogenesis, the seed consists of a mature, desiccated embryo\nthat is quiescent metabolically. Although many aspects of embryogenesis\nhave been characterized extensively, little is known"]]
["seedev_train_129", [" We showed that LEC2 RNA\naccumulates primarily during seed development, consistent with our\nfinding that LEC2 shares greatest similarity with the B3 domain\ntranscription factors that act primarily in  [CLS] developing seeds,\nVIVIPAROUS1/ABA INSENSITIVE3 [CLS]  and FUSCA3. Ectopic, postembryonic\nexpression of LEC2 in transgenic plants induces the\nformation of somatic embryos and other organ-like structures and often\nconfers embryonic characteristics to seedlings. Together, these"]]
["seedev_train_130", [" is expressed preferentially\nduring embryogenesis and encodes a protein with similarity to other\nseed-specific transcription factors. Significant insight into the role\nof the gene was obtained by showing that  [CLS] transgenic plants expressing\nthe LEC2 gene ectopically form somatic embryos [CLS] . Together,\nthese results indicate that LEC2 is sufficient to induce\nembryogenic competence.\n"]]
["seedev_train_131", [" Although many aspects of embryogenesis\nhave been characterized extensively, little is known at a mechanistic\nlevel of the processes that initiate embryo development.\nThe Arabidopsis LEAFY COTYLEDON (LEC) genes,\n [CLS] LEC1, LEC2, and FUSCA3 (FUS3), play\nkey roles in controlling embryo development [CLS]  (7). Unlike most other\nembryonic regulators that function during specific stages of\nembryogenesis (8\u201311), LEC genes are unique in that they are\nrequired for normal development during both the", " including the early acting LEC1 and L1L genes. We suggest that VAL targets Sph/RY-containing genes in the network for chromatin-mediated repression in conjunction with the PKL-related CHD3\nchromatin-remodeling factors.\n [CLS] Embryo development in plants is regulated by a network of transcription factors that include the LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1 [CLS] ) and LEC1-LIKE (L1L) genes belonging to the HAP3 family CCAAT-binding factors and a subgroup of the plant-specific B3 domain protein family composed\nof the LEC2, FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC", " [CLS] embryo development is regulated by a network of transcription factors that include LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1 [CLS] ), LEC1-LIKE (L1L), and B3 domain factors, LEAFY COTYLEDON 2 (LEC2), FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3) of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Interactions of these genes result in temporal", " [CLS] LEC1) gene is required for the specification of cotyledon identity and the completion of embryo maturation [CLS] . We isolated the LEC1 gene and showed that it functions at an early developmental stage to maintain embryonic cell fate. The LEC1 gene encodes a transcription factor homolog, the"]]
["seedev_train_132", [" [CLS] LEC2 is required for the maintenance of suspensor\nmorphology, specification of cotyledon identity, progression through\nthe maturation phase, and suppression of premature germination [CLS] . We\ncloned the LEC2 gene on the basis of its chromosomal\nposition and showed that the predicted polypeptide contains a B3\ndomain, a DNA-binding motif unique to plants that", " factors. Significant insight into the role\nof the gene was obtained by showing that transgenic plants expressing\nthe LEC2 gene ectopically form somatic embryos. Together,\nthese results indicate that  [CLS] LEC2 is sufficient to induce\nembryogenic competence [CLS] .\n", " [CLS] LEC2 is required for the maintenance of suspensor\nmorphology, specification of cotyledon identity [CLS] , progression through\nthe maturation phase, and suppression of premature germination. We\ncloned the LEC2 gene on the basis of its chromosomal\nposition and showed that the predicted polypeptide contains", " [CLS] LEC2 is required for the maintenance of suspensor\nmorphology [CLS] , specification of cotyledon identity, progression through\nthe maturation phase, and suppression of premature germination. We\ncloned the LEC2 gene on the basis of its chromosomal\nposition and showed that", " [CLS] LEC2 is required for the maintenance of suspensor\nmorphology, specification of cotyledon identity, progression through\nthe maturation phase [CLS] , and suppression of premature germination. We\ncloned the LEC2 gene on the basis of its chromosomal\nposition and showed that the predicted polypeptide contains a B3\ndomain, a DNA-binding", " LEC1, at least in part,\nmediates somatic embryo formation in pkl mutants. Given our\nresults, we hypothesize that LEC2 may also be derepressed in\npkl mutants.\nThe ability of  [CLS] LEC2 and LEC1 to induce somatic\nembryogenesis suggests a role for the genes in the establishment of\nembryogenic competence [CLS] . Somatic plant cells generally must be induced\nto become competent for somatic embryogenesis (42\u201344). Embryogenic\ncompetence is often induced by culturing cells with the hormone auxin\nand, sometimes cytokinin,", " LEC1, at least in part,\nmediates somatic embryo formation in pkl mutants. Given our\nresults, we hypothesize that LEC2 may also be derepressed in\npkl mutants.\nThe ability of  [CLS] LEC2 and LEC1 to induce somatic\nembryogenesis [CLS]  suggests a role for the genes in the establishment of\nembryogenic competence. Somatic plant cells generally must be induced\nto become competent for somatic embryogenesis (42\u201344). Embryogenic\ncompetence is", "\nconsistent with analyses showing that lec1 lec2 double\nmutants arrest at an earlier embryonic stage than either single mutant,\nwhich indicates partial genetic redundancy (12, 15).\nAlthough LEC1 and  [CLS] LEC2 are each sufficient to\ninduce embryogenic competence in somatic cells [CLS] , they have similar but\nnot identical functions. Mutations in each gene result in distinct\nphenotypes, and the double mutant displays a synergistic phenotype (12,\n15, 16). Furthermore, the vast"]]
["seedev_train_133", [" role in embryogenesis and provided insight into their\nfunctions. LEC1 shares extensive sequence similarity with the HAP3\nsubunit of CCAAT-binding transcription factor, implicating LEC1 as a\ntranscriptional regulator (12).  [CLS] Ectopic expression of LEC1\nconfers embryonic characteristics to seedlings and results in the\nformation of embryo-like structures on the surfaces of leaves [CLS] ,\nsuggesting that the gene plays a role in conferring embryogenic\ncompetence to cells (12). Thus, we hypothesized that LEC1 establishes a\ncellular environment that promotes embryo development and that", " role in embryogenesis and provided insight into their\nfunctions. LEC1 shares extensive sequence similarity with the HAP3\nsubunit of CCAAT-binding transcription factor, implicating LEC1 as a\ntranscriptional regulator (12).  [CLS] Ectopic expression of LEC1\nconfers embryonic characteristics to seedlings [CLS]  and results in the\nformation of embryo-like structures on the surfaces of leaves,\nsuggesting that the gene plays a role in conferring embryogenic\ncompetence to cells (12). Thus, we", " 2003), whereas lec1 embryos complete morphogenesis and are capable of further development into plants if rescued prior to desiccation of the\nseed (Meinke, 1992, 1994; West et al., 1994).  [CLS] Ectopic expression of LEC1 or L1L is sufficient to induce embryo formation in vegetative organs [CLS]  (Lotan et al., 1998; Kwong et al., 2003). The lec1, fus3, and lec2 mutations cause partial transformation of cotyledons to leaf-like organs (Meinke, 1992, 1994; Keith et al., 1994;"]]
["seedev_train_134", [" We showed that LEC2 RNA\naccumulates primarily during seed development, consistent with our\nfinding that LEC2 shares greatest similarity with the B3 domain\ntranscription factors that act primarily in  [CLS] developing seeds,\nVIVIPAROUS1/ABA INSENSITIVE3 and FUSCA3 [CLS] . Ectopic, postembryonic\nexpression of LEC2 in transgenic plants induces the\nformation of somatic embryos and other organ-like structures and often\nconfers embryonic characteristics to seedlings. Together, these results\nsuggest"]]
["seedev_train_135", [" of embryogenesis\nhave been characterized extensively, little is known at a mechanistic\nlevel of the processes that initiate embryo development.\nThe Arabidopsis LEAFY COTYLEDON (LEC) genes,\nLEC1, LEC2, and  [CLS] FUSCA3 (FUS3), play\nkey roles in controlling embryo development [CLS]  (7). Unlike most other\nembryonic regulators that function during specific stages of\nembryogenesis (8\u201311), LEC genes are unique in that they are\nrequired for normal development during both the"]]
["seedev_train_136", [" the LEC2 gene to determine its\nrole in embryo development. Because genetic studies suggest that\nLEC1 and LEC2 may have partially redundant\nfunctions (12, 15), it is possible that  [CLS] LEC2 also functions in the\ninitiation and coordination of embryo development [CLS] . We cloned the\nLEC2 gene and showed that it is expressed preferentially\nduring embryogenesis and encodes a protein with similarity to other\nseed-specific transcription factors. Significant insight into the", " the LEC2 gene to determine its\nrole in embryo development. Because genetic studies suggest that\nLEC1 and LEC2 may have partially redundant\nfunctions (12, 15), it is possible that  [CLS] LEC2 also functions in the\ninitiation and coordination of embryo development [CLS] . We cloned the\nLEC2 gene and showed that it is expressed preferentially\nduring embryogenesis and encodes a protein with similarity to other\nseed-specific transcription factors. Significant insight into the", " (32, 37, 38). To our knowledge, the B3 DNA-binding domain\nis unique to plants.\nMaximum parsimony analysis (39) of the B3 domains of 48 predicted\nArabidopsis proteins suggests that  [CLS] LEC2, FUS3, and ABI3\nconstitute one class, perhaps indicating their common origin (S.L.S.\nand J.J.H., unpublished results). All three genes are expressed\nprimarily during embryogenesis and are required genetically for the\ncompletion of normal seed development [CLS] . Although they all play roles in\nseed development, their specific functions have diverged. ABI3 is a\ntranscription factor that operates primarily during the maturation\nphase, whereas LEC2 and FUS3", " somatic embryogenesis (42\u201344). Embryogenic\ncompetence is often induced by culturing cells with the hormone auxin\nand, sometimes cytokinin, although completion of somatic embryogenesis\nusually requires removal of the hormone(s).  [CLS] LEC2 and LEC1 obviate the\nneed for hormone treatments in the acquisition of embryogenic\ncompetence [CLS] , suggesting the two LEC transcription factors activate genes\nthat play roles in the initiation of somatic embryogenesis. Our finding\nthat both LEC2 and LEC1 RNAs are detected at the"]]
["seedev_train_137", [" postembryonic\nexpression of LEC2 in transgenic plants induces the\nformation of somatic embryos and other organ-like structures and often\nconfers embryonic characteristics to seedlings. Together, these results\nsuggest that  [CLS] LEC2 is a transcriptional regulator that establishes a\ncellular environment sufficient to initiate embryo development [CLS] .\nEmbryogenesis in flowering\nplants begins with the double fertilization event in which the zygote\nand endosperm are formed after fusion of sperm cells with the egg cell\nand central", " normal seed development. Although they all play roles in\nseed development, their specific functions have diverged. ABI3 is a\ntranscription factor that operates primarily during the maturation\nphase, whereas  [CLS] LEC2 and FUS3 are LEAFY COTYLEDON proteins required for\nprocesses during both the morphogenesis [CLS]  and maturation phases.\n", " normal seed development. Although they all play roles in\nseed development, their specific functions have diverged. ABI3 is a\ntranscription factor that operates primarily during the maturation\nphase, whereas  [CLS] LEC2 and FUS3 are LEAFY COTYLEDON proteins required for\nprocesses during both the morphogenesis and maturation phases [CLS] .\n", " (32, 37, 38). To our knowledge, the B3 DNA-binding domain\nis unique to plants.\nMaximum parsimony analysis (39) of the B3 domains of 48 predicted\nArabidopsis proteins suggests that  [CLS] LEC2, FUS3, and ABI3\nconstitute one class, perhaps indicating their common origin (S.L.S.\nand J.J.H., unpublished results). All three genes are expressed\nprimarily during embryogenesis and are required genetically for the\ncompletion of normal seed development. Although they all play roles in\nseed development [CLS] , their specific functions have diverged. ABI3 is a\ntranscription factor that operates primarily during the maturation\nphase, whereas LEC2 and FUS3 are LEAFY COTYLEDON proteins required for\nprocesses during", " [CLS] LEC2 is a key regulator of\nembryogenesis [CLS] . First, although seedlings expressing the\n35S\u2237LEC2 gene exhibited a range of\nmorphologies (Fig. 5), approximately one-third possessed embryonic\nrather than postgerminative characteristics. Cotyledons of these\nseedlings remained fleshy and"]]
["seedev_train_138", [" its chromosomal\nposition and showed that the predicted polypeptide contains a B3\ndomain, a DNA-binding motif unique to plants that is characteristic of\nseveral transcription factors. We showed that  [CLS] LEC2 RNA\naccumulates primarily during seed development [CLS] , consistent with our\nfinding that LEC2 shares greatest similarity with the B3 domain\ntranscription factors that act primarily in developing seeds,\nVIVIPAROUS1/ABA INSENSITIVE3 and FUSCA3. Ectopic, postembryonic\nexpression of"]]
["seedev_train_139", [" we hypothesized that LEC1 establishes a\ncellular environment that promotes embryo development and that this\nenvironment coordinates the morphogenesis and maturation phases.\nFUS3 also encodes a regulatory protein: a  [CLS] B3 domain\ntranscription factor that accumulates primarily during seed development [CLS] \n(19). Transient assays showed that FUS3 is sufficient to activate genes\nusually expressed during maturation (20). Thus, two LEC\ngenes seem to be involved in controlling embryo development by"]]
["seedev_train_140", ["\nthat is quiescent metabolically. Although many aspects of embryogenesis\nhave been characterized extensively, little is known at a mechanistic\nlevel of the processes that initiate embryo development.\nThe Arabidopsis  [CLS] LEAFY COTYLEDON (LEC [CLS] ) genes,\nLEC1, LEC2, and FUSCA3 (FUS3), play\nkey roles in controlling embryo development (7). Unlike most other\nembryonic regulators that function during specific stages of\nembryogenesis (8\u201311), LEC genes"]]
["seedev_train_141", [" of embryogenesis\nhave been characterized extensively, little is known at a mechanistic\nlevel of the processes that initiate embryo development.\nThe Arabidopsis LEAFY COTYLEDON (LEC) genes,\nLEC1, LEC2, and  [CLS] FUSCA3 (FUS3 [CLS] ), play\nkey roles in controlling embryo development (7). Unlike most other\nembryonic regulators that function during specific stages of\nembryogenesis (8\u201311), LEC genes are unique in that they are"]]
["seedev_train_142", [" [CLS] LEAFY COTYLEDON2\n(LEC2 [CLS] ) gene is a central embryonic regulator that serves\ncritical roles both early and late during embryo development.\nLEC2 is required for the maintenance of suspensor\nmorphology, specification of cotyledon"]]
["seedev_train_143", [" that LEC2 RNA\naccumulates primarily during seed development, consistent with our\nfinding that LEC2 shares greatest similarity with the B3 domain\ntranscription factors that act primarily in developing seeds,\n [CLS] VIVIPAROUS1/ABA INSENSITIVE3 [CLS]  and FUSCA3. Ectopic, postembryonic\nexpression of LEC2 in transgenic plants induces the\nformation of somatic embryos and other organ-like structures and often\nconfers embryonic characteristics to seedlings. Together, these"]]
["seedev_train_144", [" that\nLEC1 and LEC2 may have partially redundant\nfunctions (12, 15), it is possible that LEC2 also functions in the\ninitiation and coordination of embryo development. We cloned the\n [CLS] LEC2 gene and showed that it is expressed preferentially\nduring embryogenesis [CLS]  and encodes a protein with similarity to other\nseed-specific transcription factors. Significant insight into the role\nof the gene was obtained by showing that transgenic plants expressing\nthe LEC2", " [CLS] LEC2 gene encodes a B3 domain protein\n(Fig. 3) and is expressed primarily during embryogenesis [CLS]  (Fig. 4)\nsuggest that it, like LEC1 and FUS3, is a transcriptional regulator of\nseed development. The B3 domain is an \u2248120-amino acid residue region\ndefined originally as the"]]
["seedev_train_145", [" conferring embryogenic\ncompetence to cells (12). Thus, we hypothesized that LEC1 establishes a\ncellular environment that promotes embryo development and that this\nenvironment coordinates the morphogenesis and maturation phases.\n [CLS] FUS3 also encodes a regulatory protein: a B3 domain\ntranscription factor [CLS]  that accumulates primarily during seed development\n(19). Transient assays showed that FUS3 is sufficient to activate genes\nusually expressed during maturation (20). Thus, two LEC\ngenes seem to be"]]
["seedev_train_146", [" during embryo development.\nLEC2 is required for the maintenance of suspensor\nmorphology, specification of cotyledon identity, progression through\nthe maturation phase, and suppression of premature germination. We\ncloned the  [CLS] LEC2 gene on the basis of its chromosomal\nposition and showed that the predicted polypeptide contains a B3\ndomain [CLS] , a DNA-binding motif unique to plants that is characteristic of\nseveral transcription factors. We showed that LEC2 RNA\naccumulates primarily during seed development, consistent with our\nfinding that LEC2"]]
["seedev_train_147", [" during embryo development.\nLEC2 is required for the maintenance of suspensor\nmorphology, specification of cotyledon identity, progression through\nthe maturation phase, and suppression of premature germination. We\ncloned the  [CLS] LEC2 gene on the basis of its chromosomal\nposition and showed that the predicted polypeptide contains a B3\ndomain, a DNA-binding motif unique to plants [CLS]  that is characteristic of\nseveral transcription factors. We showed that LEC2 RNA\naccumulates primarily during seed development, consistent with our\nfinding that LEC2 shares greatest similarity with the B3", " [CLS] Arabidopsis LEAFY COTYLEDON2\n(LEC2 [CLS] ) gene is a central embryonic regulator that serves\ncritical roles both early and late during embryo development.\nLEC2 is required for the maintenance of suspensor\nmorphology, specification of cotyledon", " acting LEC1 and L1L genes. We suggest that VAL targets Sph/RY-containing genes in the network for chromatin-mediated repression in conjunction with the PKL-related CHD3\nchromatin-remodeling factors.\nEmbryo development in  [CLS] plants is regulated by a network of transcription factors that include the LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1) and LEC1-LIKE (L1L) genes belonging to the HAP3 family CCAAT-binding factors and a subgroup of the plant-specific B3 domain protein family composed\nof the LEC2 [CLS] , FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC ACID (ABA)-INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3) genes (Giraudat et al., 1992; Lotan et al., 1998; Luerssen et al., 1998; Stone et al., 2001; Kwong et al., 2003).", " [CLS] LEC2), FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3) of Arabidopsis [CLS]  (Arabidopsis thaliana). Interactions of these genes result in temporal progression of overlapping B3 gene expression culminating in maturation\nand desiccation of the seed. Three VP1/ABI3-LIKE (VAL) genes encode B3"]]
["seedev_train_148", [" through\nthe maturation phase, and suppression of premature germination. We\ncloned the LEC2 gene on the basis of its chromosomal\nposition and showed that the predicted polypeptide contains a  [CLS] B3\ndomain, a DNA-binding motif unique to plants [CLS]  that is characteristic of\nseveral transcription factors. We showed that LEC2 RNA\naccumulates primarily during seed development, consistent with our\nfinding that LEC2 shares greatest similarity with the B3", " a B3 domain protein\n(Fig. 3) and is expressed primarily during embryogenesis (Fig. 4)\nsuggest that it, like LEC1 and FUS3, is a transcriptional regulator of\nseed development. The  [CLS] B3 domain is an \u2248120-amino acid residue region\ndefined originally as the third basic region of maize [CLS]  VP1, which shares\nthe largest contiguous block of sequence identity with its ortholog,\nArabidopsis ABI3 (10). Subsequently, this domain was\nidentified in other plant proteins, such as AUXIN RESPONSE", " a B3 domain protein\n(Fig. 3) and is expressed primarily during embryogenesis (Fig. 4)\nsuggest that it, like LEC1 and FUS3, is a transcriptional regulator of\nseed development. The  [CLS] B3 domain is an \u2248120-amino acid residue region\ndefined originally as the third basic region of maize VP1, which shares\nthe largest contiguous block of sequence identity with its ortholog,\nArabidopsis [CLS]  ABI3 (10). Subsequently, this domain was\nidentified in other plant proteins, such as AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR1 (34)\nand RELATED TO ABI3/VP1 (32). Many proteins containing B3 domains,\nincluding ABI3/VP1,"]]
["seedev_train_149", [" COTYLEDON (LEC) genes,\nLEC1, LEC2, and FUSCA3 (FUS3), play\nkey roles in controlling embryo development (7). Unlike most other\nembryonic regulators that function during specific stages of\nembryogenesis (8\u201311),  [CLS] LEC genes are unique in that they are\nrequired for normal development during both the morphogenesis [CLS]  and\nmaturation phases. Early in embryogenesis, LEC genes are\nrequired to specify suspensor cell fate and cotyledon identity\n(12\u201316). Late in embryogenesis, LEC genes are needed during\nthe maturation"]]
["seedev_train_150", ["\nembryonic regulators that function during specific stages of\nembryogenesis (8\u201311), LEC genes are unique in that they are\nrequired for normal development during both the morphogenesis and\nmaturation phases.  [CLS] Early in embryogenesis, LEC [CLS]  genes are\nrequired to specify suspensor cell fate and cotyledon identity\n(12\u201316). Late in embryogenesis, LEC genes are needed during\nthe maturation phase for the acquisition of desiccation tolerance"]]
["seedev_train_151", [" for normal development during both the morphogenesis and\nmaturation phases. Early in embryogenesis, LEC genes are\nrequired to specify suspensor cell fate and cotyledon identity\n(12\u201316). Late in embryogenesis,  [CLS] LEC genes are needed during\nthe maturation phase [CLS]  for the acquisition of desiccation tolerance and\nthe expression of many maturation-specific genes (13\u201317). Consistent\nwith the finding that conditions that promote maturation suppress\ngermination (6), lec mutant embryos"]]
["seedev_train_152", [" COTYLEDON (LEC) genes,\nLEC1, LEC2, and FUSCA3 (FUS3), play\nkey roles in controlling embryo development (7). Unlike most other\nembryonic regulators that function during specific stages of\nembryogenesis (8\u201311),  [CLS] LEC genes are unique in that they are\nrequired for normal development during both the morphogenesis and\nmaturation phases [CLS] . Early in embryogenesis, LEC genes are\nrequired to specify suspensor cell fate and cotyledon identity\n(12\u201316). Late in embryogenesis, LEC genes are needed during\nthe maturation phase for the"]]
["seedev_train_153", ["\nsystems (2\u20134). The morphogenesis phase is followed by a period of\nmaturation in which processes critical for seed formation occur (5, 6).\nDuring this late phase, reserves such as  [CLS] storage proteins and lipids\nare synthesized at high rates and accumulate in the seed [CLS] . It is also\nduring the maturation phase that the embryo acquires the ability to\nwithstand desiccation at the final stage of seed development. At the\nend of embryogenesis, the", "\nsystems (2\u20134). The morphogenesis phase is followed by a period of\nmaturation in which processes critical for seed formation occur (5, 6).\nDuring this late phase, reserves such as  [CLS] storage proteins and lipids\nare synthesized at high rates and accumulate in the seed [CLS] . It is also\nduring the maturation phase that the embryo acquires the ability to\nwithstand desiccation at the final stage of seed development. At the\nend of embryogenesis, the", " seeds compared with wild-type seeds and that remained high for a longer period of seed development in ap2 mutants than they did in wild type (Fig. 4). For example,  [CLS] hexose/sucrose ratios remained high at 9 and 11 DAP in ap2 mutants but was very low during the same period of wild-type seed [CLS]  development. We speculate that the altered hexose/sucrose\nratios during ap2 mutant seed development may promote an extended period of cell division that could account for the increase in embryo", " of its interacting partners).\nWhereas Cernac and Benning (2004) have reported that expression of WRI1 cDNA under the control of the cauliflower mosaic virus 35S-promoter leads to slightly increased  [CLS] seed oil content [CLS] , neither the Pro35Sdual:WRI1 nor the ProS2:WRI1 transgene used in the present study efficiently stimulates oil accumulation in the corresponding transgenic seeds (Tables\u00a01 and 2). Several factors like growth conditions"]]
["seedev_train_154", [" roles in controlling embryo development (7). Unlike most other\nembryonic regulators that function during specific stages of\nembryogenesis (8\u201311), LEC genes are unique in that they are\nrequired for  [CLS] normal development during both the morphogenesis [CLS]  and\nmaturation phases. Early in embryogenesis, LEC genes are\nrequired to specify suspensor cell fate and cotyledon identity\n(12\u201316). Late in embryogenesis, LEC genes are needed during\nthe maturation", " B3 transcription factor expression associated with the transition\nfrom embryo morphogenesis to embryo maturation and acquisition of desiccation tolerance. RNA interference of L1L function has been shown to cause  [CLS] embryo arrest during morphogenesis [CLS]  (Kwong et al., 2003), whereas lec1 embryos complete morphogenesis and are capable of further development into plants if rescued prior to desiccation of the\nseed (Meinke, 1992, 1994; West"]]
["seedev_train_155", [" phase for the acquisition of desiccation tolerance and\nthe expression of many maturation-specific genes (13\u201317). Consistent\nwith the finding that conditions that promote maturation suppress\ngermination (6), lec mutant  [CLS] embryos prematurely activate the\npostgermination program [CLS]  (13, 15, 16, 18). Thus, LEC genes\nplay a central role in controlling many aspects of embryogenesis, and\nthey are candidates as regulators that coordinate the morphogenesis and\nmaturation", " cell differentiation events as early as the eight-cell stage and soon thereafter for proper division of the\nhypophysis and subprotoderm cells. By the early globular (\u223c32-cell) stage, dcl1-null mutant  [CLS] embryos overexpress \u223c50 miRNA targets [CLS] . In dcl1 eight-cell embryos, the two most up-regulated targets are those of miR156 and encode SPL10 and SPL11 transcription factors.\nSPL10 and SPL11 are derepressed >150-fold in dcl1 embryos", " are approximately at the same developmental stage, which enabled an estimate of\ndcl1 embryonic stages based on the morphology of their wild-type siblings. It was reported previously that sus1/dcl1  [CLS] embryos exhibit abnormal cell divisions [CLS]  at the base of the embryo proper beginning at the globular stage and in the extraembryonic\nsuspensor beginning at the heart stage (Schwartz et al. 1994). Our morphological analysis", " dermatogen stage embryos from self-pollinated dcl1-5/+ plants (Fig. 1A). By the early globular stage, morphological defects were observed in \u223c25% of embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants (Fig. 1A). These  [CLS] embryos with defects were presumably homozygous for dcl1-5-null alleles, and their defects included abnormal hypophysis cell divisions [CLS]  as well as the previously unreported loss of\npericlinal subprotoderm cell divisions in the embryo proper (Fig. 1A). In subsequent stages, these abnormal embryos did not produce cotyledons and", " dermatogen stage embryos from self-pollinated dcl1-5/+ plants (Fig. 1A). By the early globular stage, morphological defects were observed in \u223c25% of embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants (Fig. 1A). These  [CLS] embryos with defects were presumably homozygous for dcl1-5-null alleles, and their defects included abnormal hypophysis cell divisions as well as the previously unreported loss of\npericlinal subprotoderm cell divisions in the embryo proper [CLS]  (Fig. 1A). In subsequent stages, these abnormal embryos did not produce cotyledons and were developmentally arrested and nonviable\n(Fig. 1A; Schwartz et al. 1994). Furthermore, dcl1-5 homozygous seedlings could", " could not be recovered from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants, which suggested that the developmentally arrested embryos derived from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants were indeed homozygous for dcl1-5 (data not shown). Because  [CLS] embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ and selfed dcl1-10/+ plants exhibited the same morphological defects [CLS]  at indistinguishable frequencies, subsequent analyses focused on embryos\nfrom selfed dcl1-5/+ plants (Table 1; data not shown). DCL1 transcripts were detected by quantitative RT\u2013PCT (qRT\u2013PCR) in both early globular", " the suspensor cell most proximal\nto the embryo proper) of 19% (29 of 154) of dermatogen stage embryos from self-pollinated dcl1-5/+ plants (Fig. 1A). By the early globular stage,  [CLS] morphological defects were observed in \u223c25% of embryos [CLS]  from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants (Fig. 1A). These embryos with defects were presumably homozygous for dcl1-5-null alleles, and their defects included abnormal hypophysis cell divisions as well as the previously", " [CLS] embryos exhibit morphological defects [CLS]  and arrest at the globular stage of development (Schwartz et al. 1994). To identify the earliest dcl1 morphological defects, we systematically analyzed dcl1 embryos throughout early embryogenesis. Because dcl1", " [CLS] embryos exhibit morphological defects and arrest at the globular stage of development [CLS]  (Schwartz et al. 1994). To identify the earliest dcl1 morphological defects, we systematically analyzed dcl1 embryos throughout early embryogenesis. Because dcl1 embryos are not viable, embryos from self-pollinated plants", " the presumptive hypophysis ectopically expressed DR5rev\u2237GFP\n(Fig. 1B). Therefore, DCL1 is required for the hypophysis-specific increase in auxin signaling. Given the severe subprotodermal defects observed in\ndcl1 embryos, the  [CLS] inappropriate auxin signaling observed in dcl1 embryos [CLS]  was likely due to the incorrect expression of auxin transport and/or auxin signaling factors. Therefore, the auxin\nresponse defects observed in dcl1 embryos were probably secondary consequences of subprotoderm", " cells often expressed DR5rev\u2237GFP, cells located above the presumptive hypophysis ectopically expressed DR5rev\u2237GFP\n(Fig. 1B). Therefore, DCL1 is required for the hypophysis-specific increase in auxin signaling. Given the severe  [CLS] subprotodermal defects observed in\ndcl1 embryos [CLS] , the inappropriate auxin signaling observed in dcl1 embryos was likely due to the incorrect expression of auxin transport and/or auxin signaling factors. Therefore, the auxin\nresponse defects observed in", " in dcl1 globular embryos (Fig. 1B; Supplemental Fig. 2). Considered together with the defective hypophysis cell divisions observed in dcl1 embryos, the lack of hypophysis markers indicates that the  [CLS] hypophysis is misspecified in dcl1 embryos [CLS] .\nThe plant hormone auxin is transported from the embryo proper to the presumptive hypophysis and contributes to hypophysis\nspecification (Friml et al. 2003; Aida et al. 2004; Weijers et", " 69) of eight-cell and dermatogen stage embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants, suggesting that basal cell lineage differentiation is not perturbed in all preglobular dcl1 embryos (Fig. 1B). Thus, dcl1  [CLS] embryos had detectable defects in the differentiation of apical cell [CLS]  but not basal cell descendents as early as the eight-cell\nstage.\nTo test whether DCL1 is required for radial patterning, we examined a series of markers that are differentially", " dcl1-5 suspensors had reduced levels of WOX8 transcripts (Fig. 1B). Furthermore, hypophysis markers were not detectable in dcl1 globular embryos (Fig. 1B; Supplemental Fig. 2). Considered together with the  [CLS] defective hypophysis cell divisions observed in dcl1 embryos [CLS] , the lack of hypophysis markers indicates that the hypophysis is misspecified in dcl1 embryos.\nThe plant hormone auxin is transported from the embryo proper to the presumptive hypophysis and", "\n(Fig. 1B). Therefore, DCL1 is required for the hypophysis-specific increase in auxin signaling. Given the severe subprotodermal defects observed in\ndcl1 embryos, the inappropriate auxin signaling observed in dcl1  [CLS] embryos was likely due to the incorrect expression of auxin transport and/or auxin signaling factors [CLS] . Therefore, the auxin\nresponse defects observed in dcl1 embryos were probably secondary consequences of subprotoderm cell differentiation defects, which in turn were probably due\nto the apical cell lineage", " 69) of eight-cell and dermatogen stage embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants, suggesting that basal cell lineage differentiation is not perturbed in all preglobular dcl1 embryos (Fig. 1B). Thus, dcl1  [CLS] embryos had detectable defects in the differentiation of apical cell but not basal cell [CLS]  descendents as early as the eight-cell\nstage.\nTo test whether DCL1 is required for radial patterning, we examined a series of markers that are differentially expressed along the radial", " defects observed in\ndcl1 embryos, the inappropriate auxin signaling observed in dcl1 embryos was likely due to the incorrect expression of auxin transport and/or auxin signaling factors. Therefore, the  [CLS] auxin\nresponse defects observed in dcl1 embryos [CLS]  were probably secondary consequences of subprotoderm cell differentiation defects, which in turn were probably due\nto the apical cell lineage defects observed at the preglobular stages.\n", " et al. 2006). Because the auxin signaling-responsive DR5rev promoter fused to GFP (DR5rev\u2237GFP) is specifically active in the hypophysis cells of wild-type globular embryos (Friml et al. 2003), and  [CLS] hypophysis specification is perturbed in dcl1 embryos [CLS] , we examined the activity of DR5rev\u2237GFP in dcl1-5 embryos to test whether DCL1 was required for appropriate auxin signaling. Although presumptive dcl1-5 hypophysis cells often expressed DR5rev\u2237GFP, cells located", " inappropriate auxin signaling observed in dcl1 embryos was likely due to the incorrect expression of auxin transport and/or auxin signaling factors. Therefore, the auxin\nresponse defects observed in dcl1  [CLS] embryos were probably secondary consequences of subprotoderm cell differentiation defects [CLS] , which in turn were probably due\nto the apical cell lineage defects observed at the preglobular stages.\n", " in particular the genes that repress maturation during early embryogenesis.\nThe data presented here strongly suggest that miRNAs are these key negative regulators of the maturation program. In dcl1-15  [CLS] embryos, we observed early chloroplast maturation and early accumulation of starch grains, lipid bodies, and storage proteins [CLS] .\nOur conclusion is reinforced by the transcriptional profile of dcl1-15 torpedo stage embryos, which resembles that of older embryos. Similarly, Nodine and Bartel (2010) described the early accumulation of", " and storage proteins.\nOur conclusion is reinforced by the transcriptional profile of dcl1-15 torpedo stage embryos, which resembles that of older embryos. Similarly, Nodine and Bartel (2010) described the  [CLS] early accumulation of OLEOSIN transcripts and a heterochronic change in the transcriptional profile in dcl1-5 embryos [CLS] . Interestingly, even though the maturation program starts too early, the timing of the different components of the\nprogram seems to be unaffected. In particular, we still see accumulation of", " in particular the genes that repress maturation during early embryogenesis.\nThe data presented here strongly suggest that miRNAs are these key negative regulators of the maturation program. In dcl1-15  [CLS] embryos, we observed early chloroplast maturation [CLS]  and early accumulation of starch grains, lipid bodies, and storage proteins.\nOur conclusion is reinforced by the transcriptional profile of dcl1-15 torpedo stage embryos, which resembles that of older", " by the transcriptional profile of dcl1-15 torpedo stage embryos, which resembles that of older embryos. Similarly, Nodine and Bartel (2010) described the early accumulation of OLEOSIN transcripts and a  [CLS] heterochronic change in the transcriptional profile in dcl1-5 embryos [CLS] . Interestingly, even though the maturation program starts too early, the timing of the different components of the\nprogram seems to be unaffected. In particular, we still see accumulation of", " embryos, which resembles that of older embryos. Similarly, Nodine and Bartel (2010) described the early accumulation of OLEOSIN transcripts and a heterochronic change in the transcriptional profile in dcl1-5  [CLS] embryos. Interestingly, even though the maturation program [CLS]  starts too early, the timing of the different components of the\nprogram seems to be unaffected. In particular, we still see accumulation of chlorophyll preceding the expression of the", " in particular the genes that repress maturation during early embryogenesis.\nThe data presented here strongly suggest that miRNAs are these key negative regulators of the maturation program. In dcl1-15  [CLS] embryos, we observed early chloroplast maturation and early accumulation of starch grains [CLS] , lipid bodies, and storage proteins.\nOur conclusion is reinforced by the transcriptional profile of dcl1-15 torpedo stage embryos, which resembles that of older embryos. Similarly, Nodine and Bartel (2010)"]]
["seedev_train_156", ["\nembryonic regulators that function during specific stages of\nembryogenesis (8\u201311), LEC genes are unique in that they are\nrequired for normal development during both the morphogenesis and\nmaturation phases.  [CLS] Early in embryogenesis, LEC genes are\nrequired to specify suspensor cell fate [CLS]  and cotyledon identity\n(12\u201316). Late in embryogenesis, LEC genes are needed during\nthe maturation phase for the acquisition of desiccation tolerance and\nthe expression of many maturation-specific genes (13\u201317)."]]
["seedev_train_157", [" mature seed.\nDevelopment of the zygote into the mature embryo can be divided\nconceptually into two distinct phases. During the early morphogenesis\nphase, the basic body plan of the  [CLS] plant is established with expression\nof polarity as a shoot\u2013root axis, specification of morphological\ndomains within the embryo [CLS] , and formation of embryonic tissue and organ\nsystems (2\u20134). The morphogenesis phase is followed by a period of\nmaturation in which processes critical for seed formation occur (5, 6).", " mature seed.\nDevelopment of the zygote into the mature embryo can be divided\nconceptually into two distinct phases. During the early morphogenesis\nphase, the basic body plan of the  [CLS] plant is established with expression\nof polarity as a shoot\u2013root axis, specification of morphological\ndomains within the embryo, and formation of embryonic tissue and organ\nsystems [CLS]  (2\u20134). The morphogenesis phase is followed by a period of\nmaturation in which processes critical for seed formation occur (5, 6).\nDuring this late phase, reserves such as storage", " mature seed.\nDevelopment of the zygote into the mature embryo can be divided\nconceptually into two distinct phases. During the early morphogenesis\nphase, the basic body plan of the  [CLS] plant is established with expression\nof polarity as a shoot\u2013root axis, specification of morphological\ndomains within the embryo, and formation of embryonic tissue [CLS]  and organ\nsystems (2\u20134). The morphogenesis phase is followed by a period of\nmaturation in which processes critical for seed formation occur (5, 6).\nDuring this late phase, reserves", " mature seed.\nDevelopment of the zygote into the mature embryo can be divided\nconceptually into two distinct phases. During the early morphogenesis\nphase, the basic body plan of the  [CLS] plant is established with expression\nof polarity as a shoot\u2013root axis [CLS] , specification of morphological\ndomains within the embryo, and formation of embryonic tissue and organ\nsystems (2\u20134). The morphogenesis phase is followed by a period of\nmaturation in which processes", " Fig. 2). Considered together with the defective hypophysis cell divisions observed in dcl1 embryos, the lack of hypophysis markers indicates that the hypophysis is misspecified in dcl1 embryos.\nThe  [CLS] plant hormone auxin is transported from the embryo proper to the presumptive hypophysis and contributes to hypophysis\nspecification [CLS]  (Friml et al. 2003; Aida et al. 2004; Weijers et al. 2006). Because the auxin signaling-responsive DR5rev promoter fused to GFP (DR5rev\u2237GFP) is specifically active in the hypophysis cells"]]
["seedev_train_158", [" this late phase, reserves such as storage proteins and lipids\nare synthesized at high rates and accumulate in the seed. It is also\nduring the maturation phase that the  [CLS] embryo acquires the ability to\nwithstand desiccation [CLS]  at the final stage of seed development. At the\nend of embryogenesis, the seed consists of a mature, desiccated embryo\nthat is quiescent metabolically. Although many aspects of embryogenesis"]]
["seedev_train_159", [" morphogenesis and\nmaturation phases. Early in embryogenesis, LEC genes are\nrequired to specify suspensor cell fate and cotyledon identity\n(12\u201316). Late in embryogenesis, LEC genes are needed during\nthe  [CLS] maturation phase for the acquisition of desiccation tolerance [CLS]  and\nthe expression of many maturation-specific genes (13\u201317). Consistent\nwith the finding that conditions that promote maturation suppress\ngermination (6), lec mutant embryos prematurely activate the\npostgermination program (13,"]]
["seedev_train_160", [" roles in controlling embryo development (7). Unlike most other\nembryonic regulators that function during specific stages of\nembryogenesis (8\u201311), LEC genes are unique in that they are\nrequired for  [CLS] normal development during both the morphogenesis and\nmaturation phases [CLS] . Early in embryogenesis, LEC genes are\nrequired to specify suspensor cell fate and cotyledon identity\n(12\u201316). Late in embryogenesis, LEC genes are needed during\nthe maturation phase for the"]]
["seedev_train_161", [" development. Although they all play roles in\nseed development, their specific functions have diverged. ABI3 is a\ntranscription factor that operates primarily during the maturation\nphase, whereas LEC2 and  [CLS] FUS3 are LEAFY COTYLEDON [CLS]  proteins required for\nprocesses during both the morphogenesis and maturation phases.\n", " aspects of Arabidopsis seed maturation (Parcy et\u00a0al. 1997). Future studies will have to elucidate to what extent structural similarities of FUS3 and ABI3 contribute to this synergism.\nSo far,  [CLS] FUS3 is the smallest member of the protein family characterized by VP1/ABI3-like B3 domains [CLS]  (Fig.\u00a06). VP1 and ABI3, as well as their presumed orthologs in bean (Bobb et\u00a0al. 1995) or rice (Hattori et\u00a0al. 1994), have two additional basic domains, B1 and B2 (Giraudat"]]
["seedev_train_162", [" 37, 38). To our knowledge, the B3 DNA-binding domain\nis unique to plants.\nMaximum parsimony analysis (39) of the B3 domains of 48 predicted\nArabidopsis proteins suggests that LEC2,  [CLS] FUS3, and ABI3\nconstitute one class, perhaps indicating their common origin (S.L.S.\nand J.J.H., unpublished results). All three genes are expressed\nprimarily during embryogenesis and are required genetically for the\ncompletion of normal seed development. Although they all play roles in\nseed development [CLS] , their specific functions have diverged. ABI3 is a\ntranscription factor that operates primarily during the maturation\nphase, whereas LEC2 and FUS3 are LEAFY COTYLEDON proteins required for\nprocesses during", " development. Although they all play roles in\nseed development, their specific functions have diverged. ABI3 is a\ntranscription factor that operates primarily during the maturation\nphase, whereas LEC2 and  [CLS] FUS3 are LEAFY COTYLEDON proteins required for\nprocesses during both the morphogenesis and maturation phases [CLS] .\n", " development. Although they all play roles in\nseed development, their specific functions have diverged. ABI3 is a\ntranscription factor that operates primarily during the maturation\nphase, whereas LEC2 and  [CLS] FUS3 are LEAFY COTYLEDON proteins required for\nprocesses during both the morphogenesis [CLS]  and maturation phases.\n"]]
["seedev_train_163", [" are expressed\nprimarily during embryogenesis and are required genetically for the\ncompletion of normal seed development. Although they all play roles in\nseed development, their specific functions have diverged.  [CLS] ABI3 is a\ntranscription factor that operates primarily during the maturation\nphase [CLS] , whereas LEC2 and FUS3 are LEAFY COTYLEDON proteins required for\nprocesses during both the morphogenesis and maturation phases.\n", " To our knowledge, the B3 DNA-binding domain\nis unique to plants.\nMaximum parsimony analysis (39) of the B3 domains of 48 predicted\nArabidopsis proteins suggests that LEC2, FUS3, and  [CLS] ABI3\nconstitute one class, perhaps indicating their common origin (S.L.S.\nand J.J.H., unpublished results). All three genes are expressed\nprimarily during embryogenesis and are required genetically for the\ncompletion of normal seed development. Although they all play roles in\nseed development [CLS] , their specific functions have diverged. ABI3 is a\ntranscription factor that operates primarily during the maturation\nphase, whereas LEC2 and FUS3 are LEAFY COTYLEDON proteins required for\nprocesses during"]]
["seedev_train_164", [" To our knowledge, the B3 DNA-binding domain\nis unique to plants.\nMaximum parsimony analysis (39) of the B3 domains of 48 predicted\nArabidopsis proteins suggests that LEC2, FUS3, and  [CLS] ABI3\nconstitute one class, perhaps indicating their common origin (S.L.S.\nand J.J.H., unpublished results). All three genes are expressed\nprimarily during embryogenesis and are required genetically for the\ncompletion of normal seed development [CLS] . Although they all play roles in\nseed development, their specific functions have diverged. ABI3 is a\ntranscription factor that operates primarily during the maturation\nphase, whereas LEC2 and FUS3", " the Sph/RY cis-element (Hattori et al., 1992; Kao et al., 1996; Ezcurra et al., 1999; Reidt et al., 2000; Chandrasekharan et al., 2003; Nag et al., 2005). In addition,  [CLS] ABI3 mediates ABA-regulated gene expression [CLS]  in the seed through interaction with specific basic Leu-zipper transcription factors\nthat bind ABA response elements (Finkelstein et al., 2002). FUS3 and LEC2 are implicated in repression of GA"]]
["seedev_train_165", [" 37, 38). To our knowledge, the B3 DNA-binding domain\nis unique to plants.\nMaximum parsimony analysis (39) of the B3 domains of 48 predicted\nArabidopsis proteins suggests that LEC2,  [CLS] FUS3, and ABI3\nconstitute one class, perhaps indicating their common origin (S.L.S.\nand J.J.H., unpublished results). All three genes are expressed\nprimarily during embryogenesis and are required genetically for the\ncompletion of normal seed development [CLS] . Although they all play roles in\nseed development, their specific functions have diverged. ABI3 is a\ntranscription factor that operates primarily during the maturation\nphase, whereas LEC2 and FUS3"]]
["seedev_train_166", [" with its ortholog,\nArabidopsis ABI3 (10). Subsequently, this domain was\nidentified in other plant proteins, such as AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR1 (34)\nand RELATED TO ABI3/VP1 (32). Many proteins containing  [CLS] B3 domains,\nincluding ABI3/VP1 [CLS] , FUS3, and AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR1, function as\ntranscription factors (20, 33, 34). The B3 domain is responsible, at\nleast in part, for the DNA-binding activity of ABI3/VP1 and RELATED", " with its ortholog,\nArabidopsis ABI3 (10). Subsequently, this domain was\nidentified in other plant proteins, such as AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR1 (34)\nand RELATED TO ABI3/VP1 (32). Many proteins containing  [CLS] B3 domains,\nincluding ABI3/VP1, FUS3 [CLS] , and AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR1, function as\ntranscription factors (20, 33, 34). The B3 domain is responsible, at\nleast in part, for the DNA-binding activity of ABI3/VP1 and RELATED\nTO", " with its ortholog,\nArabidopsis ABI3 (10). Subsequently, this domain was\nidentified in other plant proteins, such as AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR1 (34)\nand RELATED TO ABI3/VP1 (32). Many proteins containing  [CLS] B3 domains,\nincluding ABI3/VP1, FUS3, and AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR1 [CLS] , function as\ntranscription factors (20, 33, 34). The B3 domain is responsible, at\nleast in part, for the DNA-binding activity of ABI3/VP1 and RELATED\nTO ABI3/VP1 (32, 37, 38).", " with its ortholog,\nArabidopsis ABI3 (10). Subsequently, this domain was\nidentified in other plant proteins, such as AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR1 (34)\nand RELATED TO ABI3/VP1 (32). Many proteins containing  [CLS] B3 domains,\nincluding ABI3 [CLS] /VP1, FUS3, and AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR1, function as\ntranscription factors (20, 33, 34). The B3 domain is responsible, at\nleast in part, for the DNA-binding activity of ABI3/VP1 and RELATED"]]
["seedev_train_167", [" 37, 38). To our knowledge, the B3 DNA-binding domain\nis unique to plants.\nMaximum parsimony analysis (39) of the B3 domains of 48 predicted\nArabidopsis proteins suggests that LEC2,  [CLS] FUS3, and ABI3\nconstitute one class, perhaps indicating their common origin (S.L.S.\nand J.J.H., unpublished results). All three genes are expressed\nprimarily during embryogenesis [CLS]  and are required genetically for the\ncompletion of normal seed development. Although they all play roles in\nseed development, their specific functions have diverged. ABI3 is a\ntranscription factor"]]
["seedev_train_168", [" a B3 domain protein\n(Fig. 3) and is expressed primarily during embryogenesis (Fig. 4)\nsuggest that it, like LEC1 and FUS3, is a transcriptional regulator of\nseed development. The  [CLS] B3 domain is an \u2248120-amino acid residue region\ndefined originally as the third basic region of maize VP1 [CLS] , which shares\nthe largest contiguous block of sequence identity with its ortholog,\nArabidopsis ABI3 (10). Subsequently, this domain was\nidentified in other plant proteins, such as AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR1", " a B3 domain protein\n(Fig. 3) and is expressed primarily during embryogenesis (Fig. 4)\nsuggest that it, like LEC1 and FUS3, is a transcriptional regulator of\nseed development. The  [CLS] B3 domain is an \u2248120-amino acid residue region\ndefined originally as the third basic region of maize VP1, which shares\nthe largest contiguous block of sequence identity with its ortholog,\nArabidopsis ABI3 [CLS]  (10). Subsequently, this domain was\nidentified in other plant proteins, such as AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR1 (34)\nand RELATED TO ABI3/VP1 (32). Many proteins containing B3 domains,\nincluding ABI3/VP1, FUS3,", " a B3 domain protein\n(Fig. 3) and is expressed primarily during embryogenesis (Fig. 4)\nsuggest that it, like LEC1 and FUS3, is a transcriptional regulator of\nseed development. The  [CLS] B3 domain is an \u2248120-amino acid residue region\ndefined originally as the third basic region of maize VP1, which shares\nthe largest contiguous block of sequence identity with its ortholog,\nArabidopsis ABI3 (10). Subsequently, this domain was\nidentified in other plant proteins, such as AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR1 [CLS]  (34)\nand RELATED TO ABI3/VP1 (32). Many proteins containing B3 domains,\nincluding ABI3/VP1, FUS3, and AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR1, function as\ntranscription factors (20, 33, 34). The B3 domain is", " a B3 domain protein\n(Fig. 3) and is expressed primarily during embryogenesis (Fig. 4)\nsuggest that it, like LEC1 and FUS3, is a transcriptional regulator of\nseed development. The  [CLS] B3 domain is an \u2248120-amino acid residue region\ndefined originally as the third basic region of maize VP1, which shares\nthe largest contiguous block of sequence identity with its ortholog,\nArabidopsis ABI3 (10). Subsequently, this domain was\nidentified in other plant proteins, such as AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR1 (34)\nand RELATED TO ABI3/VP1 [CLS]  (32). Many proteins containing B3 domains,\nincluding ABI3/VP1, FUS3, and AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR1, function as\ntranscription factors (20, 33, 34). The B3 domain is responsible, at\nleast in part,"]]
["seedev_train_169", [" (20, 33, 34). The B3 domain is responsible, at\nleast in part, for the DNA-binding activity of ABI3/VP1 and RELATED\nTO ABI3/VP1 (32, 37, 38). To our knowledge, the  [CLS] B3 DNA-binding domain\nis unique to plants [CLS] .\nMaximum parsimony analysis (39) of the B3 domains of 48 predicted\nArabidopsis proteins suggests that LEC2, FUS3, and ABI3\nconstitute one class, perhaps indicating their common origin (S.L.S.\nand"]]
["seedev_train_170", [" [CLS] LEC2 Possesses a B3 Domain [CLS]  Characteristic of Transcription Factors.\nOur findings that the LEC2 gene encodes a B3 domain protein\n(Fig. 3) and is expressed primarily during embryogenesis (Fig. 4)\nsuggest that it, like"]]
["seedev_train_171", [" To our knowledge, the B3 DNA-binding domain\nis unique to plants.\nMaximum parsimony analysis (39) of the B3 domains of 48 predicted\nArabidopsis proteins suggests that LEC2, FUS3, and  [CLS] ABI3\nconstitute one class, perhaps indicating their common origin (S.L.S.\nand J.J.H., unpublished results). All three genes are expressed\nprimarily during embryogenesis [CLS]  and are required genetically for the\ncompletion of normal seed development. Although they all play roles in\nseed development, their specific functions have diverged. ABI3 is a\ntranscription factor"]]
["seedev_train_172", [" (32, 37, 38). To our knowledge, the B3 DNA-binding domain\nis unique to plants.\nMaximum parsimony analysis (39) of the B3 domains of 48 predicted\nArabidopsis proteins suggests that  [CLS] LEC2, FUS3, and ABI3\nconstitute one class, perhaps indicating their common origin (S.L.S.\nand J.J.H., unpublished results). All three genes are expressed\nprimarily during embryogenesis [CLS]  and are required genetically for the\ncompletion of normal seed development. Although they all play roles in\nseed development, their specific functions have diverged. ABI3 is a\ntranscription factor"]]
["seedev_train_173", [" [CLS] LEC2 gene encodes a B3 domain protein [CLS] \n(Fig. 3) and is expressed primarily during embryogenesis (Fig. 4)\nsuggest that it, like LEC1 and FUS3, is a transcriptional regulator of\nseed development. The B3 domain is an"]]
["seedev_train_174", [" it, like LEC1 and FUS3, is a transcriptional regulator of\nseed development. The B3 domain is an \u2248120-amino acid residue region\ndefined originally as the third basic region of  [CLS] maize VP1 [CLS] , which shares\nthe largest contiguous block of sequence identity with its ortholog,\nArabidopsis ABI3 (10). Subsequently, this domain was\nidentified in other plant proteins, such as AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR1"]]
["seedev_train_175", [" domain is an \u2248120-amino acid residue region\ndefined originally as the third basic region of maize VP1, which shares\nthe largest contiguous block of sequence identity with its ortholog,\n [CLS] Arabidopsis ABI3 [CLS]  (10). Subsequently, this domain was\nidentified in other plant proteins, such as AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR1 (34)\nand RELATED TO ABI3/VP1 (32). Many proteins containing B3 domains,\nincluding ABI3/VP1, FUS3,", " a synergistic increase in target gene activation.\nFull-level target gene activation is strongly correlated with the ratio of the correspondent bZIP heterodimerization partners.\nWhereas bZIP53 does not interact with  [CLS] ABI3, a crucial transcriptional regulator in Arabidopsis [CLS]  seeds, ternary complex formation between the bZIP heterodimers and ABI3 increases the expression of MAT genes in planta.\nWe therefore propose that heterodimers containing bZIP53 participate in enhanceosome formation", " a synergistic increase in target gene activation.\nFull-level target gene activation is strongly correlated with the ratio of the correspondent bZIP heterodimerization partners.\nWhereas bZIP53 does not interact with  [CLS] ABI3, a crucial transcriptional regulator in Arabidopsis seeds, ternary complex formation between the bZIP heterodimers and ABI3 increases the expression of MAT genes in planta [CLS] .\nWe therefore propose that heterodimers containing bZIP53 participate in enhanceosome formation to produce a dramatic increase\nin MAT gene transcription.\n", " ratio of the correspondent bZIP heterodimerization partners.\nWhereas bZIP53 does not interact with ABI3, a crucial transcriptional regulator in Arabidopsis seeds, ternary complex formation between the bZIP heterodimers and  [CLS] ABI3 increases the expression of MAT genes in planta [CLS] .\nWe therefore propose that heterodimers containing bZIP53 participate in enhanceosome formation to produce a dramatic increase\nin MAT gene transcription.\n"]]
["seedev_train_176", [" of expressing the LEC2 gene\npostembryonically provide insight into its role in embryo development\nand strongly support the conclusion that LEC2 is a key regulator of\nembryogenesis. First, although  [CLS] seedlings expressing the\n35S\u2237LEC2 gene exhibited a range of\nmorphologies (Fig. 5), approximately one-third possessed embryonic\nrather than postgerminative characteristics [CLS] . Cotyledons of these\nseedlings remained fleshy and did not expand, and their roots and\nhypocotyls did not extend, suggesting that ectopic LEC2\nexpression can extend embryonic development.\n35S\u2237LEC2 seedlings"]]
["seedev_train_177", [" that LEC2\nRNA accumulation is regulated posttranscriptionally, thereby accounting\nfor the ability of somatic embryos to \u201cgerminate\u201d and, in some\ncases, give rise to masses of vegetatively growing plantlets.\n [CLS] Transgenic seedlings ectopically expressing a different LEC\ngene, LEC1, have embryonic characteristics [CLS]  that are\nsubstantially similar to those of 35S\u2237LEC2\nembryo-like seedlings (12). Moreover, postembryonic expression of\nLEC1 is sufficient to induce somatic embryogenesis in\ntransgenic plants as occurs with 35S\u2237LEC2"]]
["seedev_train_178", [" masses of vegetatively growing plantlets.\nTransgenic seedlings ectopically expressing a different LEC\ngene, LEC1, have embryonic characteristics that are\nsubstantially similar to those of 35S\u2237LEC2\nembryo-like seedlings (12). Moreover,  [CLS] postembryonic expression of\nLEC1 is sufficient to induce somatic embryogenesis [CLS]  in\ntransgenic plants as occurs with 35S\u2237LEC2\nseedlings, although somatic embryo formation is more robust with\nLEC2. Recessive mutations in the Arabidopsis\nPICKLE (PKL) gene also induce somatic embryogenesis"]]
["seedev_train_179", [" 5), approximately one-third possessed embryonic\nrather than postgerminative characteristics. Cotyledons of these\nseedlings remained fleshy and did not expand, and their roots and\nhypocotyls did not extend, suggesting that  [CLS] ectopic LEC2\nexpression can extend embryonic development [CLS] .\n35S\u2237LEC2 seedlings at the other end of the\nphenotypic spectrum initially resembled wild type. The reason for this\nrange of phenotypes is not clear, but one possibility is that", " indicated by their morphological similarities with zygotic\nembryos, their expression of embryo-specific genes, and their\nestablishment of functional apical meristems (Figs. 5 and 6). Together,\nthese results suggest that  [CLS] ectopic LEC2 expression is\nsufficient to establish an embryonic environment that promotes somatic\nembryo formation [CLS] . In this regard, it is possible that LEC2\nRNA accumulation is regulated posttranscriptionally, thereby accounting\nfor the ability of somatic embryos to \u201cgerminate\u201d and, in some\ncases, give rise"]]
["seedev_train_180", [" although completion of somatic embryogenesis\nusually requires removal of the hormone(s). LEC2 and LEC1 obviate the\nneed for hormone treatments in the acquisition of embryogenic\ncompetence, suggesting the two  [CLS] LEC transcription factors activate genes\nthat play roles in the initiation of somatic embryogenesis [CLS] . Our finding\nthat both LEC2 and LEC1 RNAs are detected at the\nearliest embryonic stages tested (Fig. 4; ref. 12) opens the\npossibility that both genes are involved in"]]
["seedev_train_181", [" (12). Moreover, postembryonic expression of\nLEC1 is sufficient to induce somatic embryogenesis in\ntransgenic plants as occurs with 35S\u2237LEC2\nseedlings, although somatic embryo formation is more robust with\nLEC2.  [CLS] Recessive mutations in the Arabidopsis\nPICKLE (PKL) gene also induce somatic embryogenesis in\npostgerminative roots [CLS]  cultured on hormone-free medium (40). However,\nLEC1 is expressed in the roots of pkl mutant but\nnot wild-type seedlings (41). This result suggests that the\nchromodomain protein PKL acts"]]
["seedev_train_182", [" (42\u201344). Embryogenic\ncompetence is often induced by culturing cells with the hormone auxin\nand, sometimes cytokinin, although completion of somatic embryogenesis\nusually requires removal of the hormone(s). LEC2 and  [CLS] LEC1 obviate the\nneed for hormone treatments in the acquisition of embryogenic\ncompetence [CLS] , suggesting the two LEC transcription factors activate genes\nthat play roles in the initiation of somatic embryogenesis. Our finding\nthat both LEC2 and LEC1 RNAs are detected at the", " the roots of pkl mutant but\nnot wild-type seedlings (41). This result suggests that the\nchromodomain protein PKL acts normally to repress LEC1 in\npostgerminative roots, and therefore that  [CLS] LEC1, at least in part,\nmediates somatic embryo formation [CLS]  in pkl mutants. Given our\nresults, we hypothesize that LEC2 may also be derepressed in\npkl mutants.\nThe ability of LEC2 and LEC1 to induce somatic\nembryogenesis suggests a", "\nin endosperm tissue. Ectopic postembryonic expression of the LEC1\ngene in vegetative cells induces the expression of embryo-specific\ngenes and initiates formation of embryo-like structures. Our results\nsuggest that  [CLS] LEC1 is an important regulator of embryo development that\nactivates the transcription of genes required for both embryo\nmorphogenesis [CLS]  and cellular differentiation.prs.rt(\"abs_end\");\n", "\nin endosperm tissue. Ectopic postembryonic expression of the LEC1\ngene in vegetative cells induces the expression of embryo-specific\ngenes and initiates formation of embryo-like structures. Our results\nsuggest that  [CLS] LEC1 is an important regulator of embryo development that\nactivates the transcription of genes required for both embryo\nmorphogenesis and cellular differentiation [CLS] .prs.rt(\"abs_end\");\n"]]
["seedev_train_183", ["\nsubstantially similar to those of 35S\u2237LEC2\nembryo-like seedlings (12). Moreover, postembryonic expression of\nLEC1 is sufficient to induce somatic embryogenesis in\ntransgenic plants as occurs with 35S\u2237LEC2\nseedlings, although  [CLS] somatic embryo formation is more robust with\nLEC2 [CLS] . Recessive mutations in the Arabidopsis\nPICKLE (PKL) gene also induce somatic embryogenesis in\npostgerminative roots cultured on hormone-free medium (40). However,\nLEC1 is expressed in the roots of pkl"]]
["seedev_train_184", [" induce somatic\nembryogenesis suggests a role for the genes in the establishment of\nembryogenic competence. Somatic plant cells generally must be induced\nto become competent for somatic embryogenesis (42\u201344).  [CLS] Embryogenic\ncompetence is often induced by culturing cells [CLS]  with the hormone auxin\nand, sometimes cytokinin, although completion of somatic embryogenesis\nusually requires removal of the hormone(s). LEC2 and LEC1 obviate the\nneed for hormone treatments in the"]]
["seedev_train_185", [" hormone treatments in the acquisition of embryogenic\ncompetence, suggesting the two LEC transcription factors activate genes\nthat play roles in the initiation of somatic embryogenesis. Our finding\nthat both  [CLS] LEC2 and LEC1 RNAs are detected at the\nearliest embryonic stages [CLS]  tested (Fig. 4; ref. 12) opens the\npossibility that both genes are involved in establishing embryogenic\ncompetence during zygotic embryogenesis. Thus, the role of LEC2 and\nLEC1 in somatic"]]
["seedev_train_186", [" in the acquisition of embryogenic\ncompetence, suggesting the two LEC transcription factors activate genes\nthat play roles in the initiation of somatic embryogenesis. Our finding\nthat both LEC2 and  [CLS] LEC1 RNAs are detected at the\nearliest embryonic stages [CLS]  tested (Fig. 4; ref. 12) opens the\npossibility that both genes are involved in establishing embryogenic\ncompetence during zygotic embryogenesis. Thus, the role of LEC2 and\nLEC1 in somatic"]]
["seedev_train_187", ["\nLEC1 is sufficient to induce somatic embryogenesis in\ntransgenic plants as occurs with 35S\u2237LEC2\nseedlings, although somatic embryo formation is more robust with\nLEC2. Recessive mutations in the Arabidopsis\n [CLS] PICKLE (PKL [CLS] ) gene also induce somatic embryogenesis in\npostgerminative roots cultured on hormone-free medium (40). However,\nLEC1 is expressed in the roots of pkl mutant but\nnot wild-type seedlings (41). This"]]
["seedev_train_188", [" acts normally to repress LEC1 in\npostgerminative roots, and therefore that LEC1, at least in part,\nmediates somatic embryo formation in pkl mutants. Given our\nresults, we hypothesize that  [CLS] LEC2 may also be derepressed in\npkl [CLS]  mutants.\nThe ability of LEC2 and LEC1 to induce somatic\nembryogenesis suggests a role for the genes in the establishment of\nembryogenic competence. Somatic plant cells generally must be"]]
["seedev_train_189", ["\npostgerminative roots cultured on hormone-free medium (40). However,\nLEC1 is expressed in the roots of pkl mutant but\nnot wild-type seedlings (41). This result suggests that the\nchromodomain protein  [CLS] PKL acts normally to repress LEC1 [CLS]  in\npostgerminative roots, and therefore that LEC1, at least in part,\nmediates somatic embryo formation in pkl mutants. Given our\nresults, we hypothesize that LEC2 may also be derepressed"]]
["seedev_train_190", [" somatic embryo formation is more robust with\nLEC2. Recessive mutations in the Arabidopsis\nPICKLE (PKL) gene also induce somatic embryogenesis in\npostgerminative roots cultured on hormone-free medium (40). However,\n [CLS] LEC1 is expressed in the roots [CLS]  of pkl mutant but\nnot wild-type seedlings (41). This result suggests that the\nchromodomain protein PKL acts normally to repress LEC1 in\npostgerminative roots, and therefore that LEC1, at", " medium (40). However,\nLEC1 is expressed in the roots of pkl mutant but\nnot wild-type seedlings (41). This result suggests that the\nchromodomain protein PKL acts normally to repress  [CLS] LEC1 in\npostgerminative roots [CLS] , and therefore that LEC1, at least in part,\nmediates somatic embryo formation in pkl mutants. Given our\nresults, we hypothesize that LEC2 may also be derepressed in\npkl mutants."]]
["seedev_train_191", [" the roots of pkl mutant but\nnot wild-type seedlings (41). This result suggests that the\nchromodomain protein PKL acts normally to repress LEC1 in\npostgerminative roots, and therefore that  [CLS] LEC1, at least in part,\nmediates somatic embryo formation in pkl [CLS]  mutants. Given our\nresults, we hypothesize that LEC2 may also be derepressed in\npkl mutants.\nThe ability of LEC2 and LEC1 to induce somatic\nembryogenesis suggests a role for"]]
["seedev_train_192", ["\npostgerminative roots cultured on hormone-free medium (40). However,\nLEC1 is expressed in the roots of pkl mutant but\nnot wild-type seedlings (41). This result suggests that the\nchromodomain protein  [CLS] PKL acts normally to repress LEC1 in\npostgerminative roots [CLS] , and therefore that LEC1, at least in part,\nmediates somatic embryo formation in pkl mutants. Given our\nresults, we hypothesize that LEC2 may also be derepressed in\npkl mutants."]]
["seedev_train_193", ["\npostgerminative roots cultured on hormone-free medium (40). However,\nLEC1 is expressed in the roots of pkl mutant but\nnot wild-type seedlings (41). This result suggests that the\nchromodomain protein  [CLS] PKL acts normally to repress LEC1 in\npostgerminative [CLS]  roots, and therefore that LEC1, at least in part,\nmediates somatic embryo formation in pkl mutants. Given our\nresults, we hypothesize that LEC2 may also be derepressed in\npkl"]]
["seedev_train_194", [" induce somatic\nembryogenesis suggests a role for the genes in the establishment of\nembryogenic competence. Somatic plant cells generally must be induced\nto become competent for somatic embryogenesis (42\u201344).  [CLS] Embryogenic\ncompetence is often induced by culturing cells with the hormone auxin [CLS] \nand, sometimes cytokinin, although completion of somatic embryogenesis\nusually requires removal of the hormone(s). LEC2 and LEC1 obviate the\nneed for hormone treatments in the acquisition of embryogenic\ncompetence,", " Considered together with the defective hypophysis cell divisions observed in dcl1 embryos, the lack of hypophysis markers indicates that the hypophysis is misspecified in dcl1 embryos.\nThe plant hormone  [CLS] auxin is transported from the embryo proper to the presumptive hypophysis and contributes to hypophysis\nspecification [CLS]  (Friml et al. 2003; Aida et al. 2004; Weijers et al. 2006). Because the auxin signaling-responsive DR5rev promoter fused to GFP (DR5rev\u2237GFP) is specifically active in the hypophysis cells"]]
["seedev_train_195", ["\nnot wild-type seedlings (41). This result suggests that the\nchromodomain protein PKL acts normally to repress LEC1 in\npostgerminative roots, and therefore that LEC1, at least in part,\nmediates  [CLS] somatic embryo formation in pkl [CLS]  mutants. Given our\nresults, we hypothesize that LEC2 may also be derepressed in\npkl mutants.\nThe ability of LEC2 and LEC1 to induce somatic\nembryogenesis suggests a role for"]]
["seedev_train_196", [" induce somatic\nembryogenesis suggests a role for the genes in the establishment of\nembryogenic competence. Somatic plant cells generally must be induced\nto become competent for somatic embryogenesis (42\u201344).  [CLS] Embryogenic\ncompetence is often induced by culturing cells with the hormone auxin\nand, sometimes cytokinin [CLS] , although completion of somatic embryogenesis\nusually requires removal of the hormone(s). LEC2 and LEC1 obviate the\nneed for hormone treatments in the acquisition of embryogenic\ncompetence, suggesting the two"]]
["seedev_train_197", [" somatic embryo formation is more robust with\nLEC2. Recessive mutations in the Arabidopsis\nPICKLE (PKL) gene also induce somatic embryogenesis in\npostgerminative roots cultured on hormone-free medium (40). However,\n [CLS] LEC1 is expressed in the roots of pkl mutant but\nnot wild-type seedlings [CLS]  (41). This result suggests that the\nchromodomain protein PKL acts normally to repress LEC1 in\npostgerminative roots, and therefore that LEC1, at least in part,\nmediates somatic embryo formation"]]
["seedev_train_198", [" medium (40). However,\nLEC1 is expressed in the roots of pkl mutant but\nnot wild-type seedlings (41). This result suggests that the\nchromodomain protein PKL acts normally to repress  [CLS] LEC1 in\npostgerminative [CLS]  roots, and therefore that LEC1, at least in part,\nmediates somatic embryo formation in pkl mutants. Given our\nresults, we hypothesize that LEC2 may also be derepressed in\npkl"]]
["seedev_train_199", [" somatic embryo formation is more robust with\nLEC2. Recessive mutations in the Arabidopsis\nPICKLE (PKL) gene also induce somatic embryogenesis in\npostgerminative roots cultured on hormone-free medium (40). However,\n [CLS] LEC1 is expressed in the roots of pkl mutant but\nnot wild-type seedlings [CLS]  (41). This result suggests that the\nchromodomain protein PKL acts normally to repress LEC1 in\npostgerminative roots, and therefore that LEC1, at least in part,\nmediates somatic embryo formation"]]
["seedev_train_200", [" cellular phenotype seen in\nmum4 mutants is similar to that of several transcription factors (AP2 [APETALA2], TTG1 [TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1], TTG2 MYB61, and GL2 [GLABRA2]). Expression studies suggest that  [CLS] MUM4 is developmentally regulated in the seed coat by AP2 [CLS] , TTG1, and GL2, whereas TTG2 and MYB61 appear to be regulating mucilage production through alternate pathway(s). Our results provide a framework for the regulation\nof mucilage production and secretory", " stem cells undifferentiated similar to the wus mutant. We show that the premature termination of the shoot meristem in l28 mutants is caused by a mutation in the APETALA2 ( [CLS] AP2) gene that was previously identified as one of the components of the ABC model in floral patterning, where it represses AG [CLS]  (Bowman et al., 1991; Drews et al., 1991), in floral transition (Jofuku et al., 1994; Okamuro et al., 1997b), and in the control of seed size (Jofuku et al.,"]]
["seedev_train_201", [" cellular phenotype seen in\nmum4 mutants is similar to that of several transcription factors (AP2 [APETALA2], TTG1 [TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1], TTG2 MYB61, and GL2 [GLABRA2]). Expression studies suggest that  [CLS] MUM4 is developmentally regulated in the seed coat by AP2, TTG1, and GL2 [CLS] , whereas TTG2 and MYB61 appear to be regulating mucilage production through alternate pathway(s). Our results provide a framework for the regulation\nof mucilage production and secretory cell differentiation.\n"]]
["seedev_train_202", [" cellular phenotype seen in\nmum4 mutants is similar to that of several transcription factors (AP2 [APETALA2], TTG1 [TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1], TTG2 MYB61, and GL2 [GLABRA2]). Expression studies suggest that  [CLS] MUM4 is developmentally regulated in the seed coat by AP2, TTG1 [CLS] , and GL2, whereas TTG2 and MYB61 appear to be regulating mucilage production through alternate pathway(s). Our results provide a framework for the regulation\nof mucilage production and secretory cell"]]
["seedev_train_203", [" rearrangement, and secondary cell wall biosynthesis. Mutations in\nMUM4 (MUCILAGE-MODIFIED4) lead to a decrease in seed coat mucilage and incomplete cytoplasmic rearrangement. We show that MUM4 encodes a putative  [CLS] NDP-l-rhamnose synthase, an enzyme required for the synthesis of the pectin rhamnogalacturonan I [CLS] , the major component of Arabidopsis\nmucilage. This result suggests that the synthesis of monosaccharide substrates is a limiting factor in the biosynthesis of\npectinaceous seed coat mucilage. In addition,"]]
["seedev_train_204", [" that MUM4 encodes a putative NDP-l-rhamnose synthase, an enzyme required for the synthesis of the pectin rhamnogalacturonan I, the major component of Arabidopsis\nmucilage. This result suggests that the  [CLS] synthesis of monosaccharide substrates is a limiting factor in the biosynthesis of\npectinaceous seed coat mucilage [CLS] . In addition, the reduced cytoplasmic rearrangement observed in the absence of a key enzyme\nin pectin biosynthesis in mum4 mutants establishes a causal link between mucilage production and cellular"]]
["seedev_train_205", [" [CLS] seed coat epidermis undergoes a complex process of differentiation that includes the biosynthesis and secretion\nof large quantities of pectinaceous mucilage, cytoplasmic rearrangement, and secondary cell wall biosynthesis [CLS] . Mutations in\nMUM4 (MUCILAGE-MODIFIED4) lead to a decrease in seed coat mucilage and incomplete cytoplasmic rearrangement. We show that MUM4 encodes a putative NDP-l-rhamnose synthase, an enzyme required for", " [CLS] seed coat epidermis undergoes a complex process of differentiation that includes the biosynthesis and secretion\nof large quantities of pectinaceous mucilage [CLS] , cytoplasmic rearrangement, and secondary cell wall biosynthesis. Mutations in\nMUM4 (MUCILAGE-MODIFIED4) lead to a decrease in seed coat mucilage and incomplete cytoplasmic rearrangement. We show that MUM4 encodes a", " [CLS] seed coat epidermis undergoes a complex process of differentiation that includes the biosynthesis and secretion\nof large quantities of pectinaceous mucilage [CLS] , cytoplasmic rearrangement, and secondary cell wall biosynthesis. Mutations in\nMUM4 (MUCILAGE-MODIFIED4) lead to a decrease in seed coat mucilage and incomplete cytoplasmic rearrangement. We show that MUM4 encodes a"]]
["seedev_train_206", [" Arabidopsis seed coat epidermis undergoes a complex process of differentiation that includes the biosynthesis and secretion\nof large quantities of pectinaceous mucilage, cytoplasmic rearrangement, and secondary cell wall biosynthesis.  [CLS] Mutations in\nMUM4 (MUCILAGE-MODIFIED4) lead to a decrease in seed coat mucilage [CLS]  and incomplete cytoplasmic rearrangement. We show that MUM4 encodes a putative NDP-l-rhamnose synthase, an enzyme required for the synthesis of the pectin rhamnogalacturonan I, the major component of Arabidopsis", " Seed coat mucilage is dispensable under laboratory conditions in Arabidopsis and mum (mucilage-modified) mutants affecting mucilage production can be identified by a simple screening method (Western et al., 2001).  [CLS] Mutations in one of these genes, MUM4, yield a phenotype where mucilage is not released [CLS]  from hydrated mature seeds.\nSeveral genes encoding putative transcription factors have been implicated in seed coat epidermal development because mutations\nin these genes result in seeds that fail to"]]
["seedev_train_207", [" [CLS] seed coat epidermis undergoes a complex process of differentiation [CLS]  that includes the biosynthesis and secretion\nof large quantities of pectinaceous mucilage, cytoplasmic rearrangement, and secondary cell wall biosynthesis. Mutations in\nMUM4 (MUCILAGE-MODIFIED4) lead to a decrease in seed", " [CLS] seed coat epidermis undergoes a complex process of differentiation that includes the biosynthesis and secretion\nof large quantities of pectinaceous mucilage, cytoplasmic rearrangement [CLS] , and secondary cell wall biosynthesis. Mutations in\nMUM4 (MUCILAGE-MODIFIED4) lead to a decrease in seed coat mucilage and incomplete cytoplasmic rearrangement. We show that MUM4 encodes a putative NDP-l-rhamnose", " [CLS] reduction in the amount of mucilage produced and by a flattened columella in the seed\ncoat epidermis [CLS] .\n", " [CLS] flattened columella in the seed\ncoat epidermis [CLS] .\n"]]
["seedev_train_208", [" component of Arabidopsis\nmucilage. This result suggests that the synthesis of monosaccharide substrates is a limiting factor in the biosynthesis of\npectinaceous seed coat mucilage. In addition, the reduced  [CLS] cytoplasmic rearrangement observed in the absence of a key enzyme\nin pectin biosynthesis in mum4 [CLS]  mutants establishes a causal link between mucilage production and cellular morphogenesis. The cellular phenotype seen in\nmum4 mutants is similar to that of several transcription factors (AP2 [APETALA2], TTG1", " exhibit high identity at both nucleotide and amino acid levels. The ubiquitous expression of RHM1 and RHM3 can be postulated to provide a mechanism for the formation of the  [CLS] normal primary cell wall in mum4 [CLS]  mutants and the residual mucilage present in mum4 seed coats. Redundancy in genes coding for putative NDP-l-Rha synthases is unsurprising because of the importance of the Rha-containing pectins RGI", " levels. The ubiquitous expression of RHM1 and RHM3 can be postulated to provide a mechanism for the formation of the normal primary cell wall in mum4 mutants and the  [CLS] residual mucilage present in mum4 [CLS]  seed coats. Redundancy in genes coding for putative NDP-l-Rha synthases is unsurprising because of the importance of the Rha-containing pectins RGI and RGII in primary cell walls.\nIn fact,", " [CLS] mum4 phenotype is characterized by both a reduction in the amount of mucilage produced [CLS]  and by a flattened columella in the seed\ncoat epidermis.\n", " [CLS] mum4 phenotype is characterized by both a reduction in the amount of mucilage produced and by a flattened columella [CLS]  in the seed\ncoat epidermis.\n"]]
["seedev_train_209", [" (AP2 [APETALA2], TTG1 [TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1], TTG2 MYB61, and GL2 [GLABRA2]). Expression studies suggest that MUM4 is developmentally regulated in the seed coat by AP2, TTG1, and GL2, whereas  [CLS] TTG2 and MYB61 appear to be regulating mucilage production [CLS]  through alternate pathway(s). Our results provide a framework for the regulation\nof mucilage production and secretory cell differentiation.\n"]]
["seedev_train_210", [" monosaccharide substrates is a limiting factor in the biosynthesis of\npectinaceous seed coat mucilage. In addition, the reduced cytoplasmic rearrangement observed in the absence of a key enzyme\nin  [CLS] pectin biosynthesis in mum4 [CLS]  mutants establishes a causal link between mucilage production and cellular morphogenesis. The cellular phenotype seen in\nmum4 mutants is similar to that of several transcription factors (AP2 [APETALA2], TTG1"]]
["seedev_train_211", [" TTG1 [TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1], TTG2 MYB61, and GL2 [GLABRA2]). Expression studies suggest that MUM4 is developmentally regulated in the seed coat by AP2, TTG1, and GL2, whereas TTG2 and  [CLS] MYB61 appear to be regulating mucilage production [CLS]  through alternate pathway(s). Our results provide a framework for the regulation\nof mucilage production and secretory cell differentiation.\n"]]
["seedev_train_212", [" Arabidopsis seed coat epidermis undergoes a complex process of differentiation that includes the biosynthesis and secretion\nof large quantities of pectinaceous mucilage, cytoplasmic rearrangement, and secondary cell wall biosynthesis.  [CLS] Mutations in\nMUM4 (MUCILAGE-MODIFIED4) lead to a decrease in seed coat mucilage and incomplete cytoplasmic rearrangement [CLS] . We show that MUM4 encodes a putative NDP-l-rhamnose synthase, an enzyme required for the synthesis of the pectin rhamnogalacturonan I, the major component of Arabidopsis\nmucilage. This result suggests"]]
["seedev_train_213", [" for the synthesis of the pectin rhamnogalacturonan I, the major component of Arabidopsis\nmucilage. This result suggests that the synthesis of monosaccharide substrates is a limiting factor in the  [CLS] biosynthesis of\npectinaceous seed coat mucilage [CLS] . In addition, the reduced cytoplasmic rearrangement observed in the absence of a key enzyme\nin pectin biosynthesis in mum4 mutants establishes a causal link between mucilage production and cellular"]]
["seedev_train_214", [" coat epidermis undergoes a complex process of differentiation that includes the biosynthesis and secretion\nof large quantities of pectinaceous mucilage, cytoplasmic rearrangement, and secondary cell wall biosynthesis. Mutations in\n [CLS] MUM4 (MUCILAGE-MODIFIED4 [CLS] ) lead to a decrease in seed coat mucilage and incomplete cytoplasmic rearrangement. We show that MUM4 encodes a putative NDP-l-rhamnose synthase, an enzyme required for the synthesis of the"]]
["seedev_train_215", [" mum4 mutants establishes a causal link between mucilage production and cellular morphogenesis. The cellular phenotype seen in\nmum4 mutants is similar to that of several transcription factors (AP2 [APETALA2],  [CLS] TTG1 [TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1 [CLS] ], TTG2 MYB61, and GL2 [GLABRA2]). Expression studies suggest that MUM4 is developmentally regulated in the seed coat by AP2, TTG1, and GL2, whereas TTG2 and MYB61 appear to be", " in AP2 (APETALA2), in addition to their defects in floral morphogenesis, lack differentiation past the growth phase of mucilage secretory\ncells (Jofuku et al., 1994; Western et al., 2001).  [CLS] TTG1 (TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1 [CLS] ), TTG2, and GL2 (GLABRA2), which were originally identified through their role in trichome specification, have defects in both mucilage and columella\nproduction in the seed coat (Koornneef, 1981; Penfield"]]
["seedev_train_216", [" biosynthesis in mum4 mutants establishes a causal link between mucilage production and cellular morphogenesis. The cellular phenotype seen in\nmum4 mutants is similar to that of several transcription factors ( [CLS] AP2 [APETALA2 [CLS] ], TTG1 [TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1], TTG2 MYB61, and GL2 [GLABRA2]). Expression studies suggest that MUM4 is developmentally regulated in the seed coat by AP2, TTG1, and GL2, whereas TTG2 and", " encoding putative transcription factors have been implicated in seed coat epidermal development because mutations\nin these genes result in seeds that fail to release mucilage upon hydration. Mutants in  [CLS] AP2 (APETALA2 [CLS] ), in addition to their defects in floral morphogenesis, lack differentiation past the growth phase of mucilage secretory\ncells (Jofuku et al., 1994; Western et al., 2001). TTG1 (TRANSPARENT TESTA"]]
["seedev_train_217", [" mucilage production and cellular morphogenesis. The cellular phenotype seen in\nmum4 mutants is similar to that of several transcription factors (AP2 [APETALA2], TTG1 [TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1], TTG2 MYB61, and  [CLS] GL2 [GLABRA2 [CLS] ]). Expression studies suggest that MUM4 is developmentally regulated in the seed coat by AP2, TTG1, and GL2, whereas TTG2 and MYB61 appear to be regulating mucilage production through alternate", " their defects in floral morphogenesis, lack differentiation past the growth phase of mucilage secretory\ncells (Jofuku et al., 1994; Western et al., 2001). TTG1 (TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1), TTG2, and  [CLS] GL2 (GLABRA2 [CLS] ), which were originally identified through their role in trichome specification, have defects in both mucilage and columella\nproduction in the seed coat (Koornneef, 1981; Penfield et al., 2001; Western"]]
["seedev_train_218", [" of pectinaceous mucilage, cytoplasmic rearrangement, and secondary cell wall biosynthesis. Mutations in\nMUM4 (MUCILAGE-MODIFIED4) lead to a decrease in seed coat mucilage and incomplete cytoplasmic rearrangement. We show that  [CLS] MUM4 encodes a putative NDP-l-rhamnose synthase [CLS] , an enzyme required for the synthesis of the pectin rhamnogalacturonan I, the major component of Arabidopsis\nmucilage. This result suggests that the synthesis of monosaccharide substrates is a limiting", " 2001).\nThe objective of this study was to characterize the role of MUM4 in the development of the Arabidopsis seed coat. Using positional cloning of MUM4, we demonstrate that  [CLS] MUM4 encodes a putative NDP-l-Rha synthase [CLS] . Mutations in this gene lead to reduced mucilage in the seed coat and an altered columella. Expression studies\nshow that MUM4 is developmentally regulated during seed coat differentiation such"]]
["seedev_train_219", [" is similar to that of several transcription factors (AP2 [APETALA2], TTG1 [TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1], TTG2 MYB61, and GL2 [GLABRA2]). Expression studies suggest that MUM4 is developmentally regulated in the  [CLS] seed coat by AP2 [CLS] , TTG1, and GL2, whereas TTG2 and MYB61 appear to be regulating mucilage production through alternate pathway(s). Our results provide a framework for the regulation\nof mucilage production and secretory", " is similar to that of several transcription factors (AP2 [APETALA2], TTG1 [TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1], TTG2 MYB61, and GL2 [GLABRA2]). Expression studies suggest that MUM4 is developmentally regulated in the  [CLS] seed coat by AP2, TTG1, and GL2 [CLS] , whereas TTG2 and MYB61 appear to be regulating mucilage production through alternate pathway(s). Our results provide a framework for the regulation\nof mucilage production and secretory cell differentiation.\n", " is similar to that of several transcription factors (AP2 [APETALA2], TTG1 [TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1], TTG2 MYB61, and GL2 [GLABRA2]). Expression studies suggest that MUM4 is developmentally regulated in the  [CLS] seed coat by AP2, TTG1 [CLS] , and GL2, whereas TTG2 and MYB61 appear to be regulating mucilage production through alternate pathway(s). Our results provide a framework for the regulation\nof mucilage production and secretory cell", " cellular phenotype seen in\nmum4 mutants is similar to that of several transcription factors (AP2 [APETALA2], TTG1 [TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1], TTG2 MYB61, and GL2 [GLABRA2]). Expression studies suggest that  [CLS] MUM4 is developmentally regulated in the seed coat [CLS]  by AP2, TTG1, and GL2, whereas TTG2 and MYB61 appear to be regulating mucilage production through alternate pathway(s). Our results provide a framework for the regulation\nof mucilage production", " in AP2 (APETALA2), in addition to their defects in floral morphogenesis, lack differentiation past the growth phase of mucilage secretory\ncells (Jofuku et al., 1994; Western et al., 2001).  [CLS] TTG1 (TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1), TTG2, and GL2 (GLABRA2), which were originally identified through their role in trichome specification, have defects in both mucilage and columella\nproduction in the seed coat [CLS]  (Koornneef, 1981; Penfield et al., 2001; Western et al., 2001; Johnson et al., 2002). It has been shown at the genetic and molecular levels in trichomes and root hairs", " their defects in floral morphogenesis, lack differentiation past the growth phase of mucilage secretory\ncells (Jofuku et al., 1994; Western et al., 2001). TTG1 (TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1), TTG2, and  [CLS] GL2 (GLABRA2), which were originally identified through their role in trichome specification, have defects in both mucilage and columella\nproduction in the seed coat [CLS]  (Koornneef, 1981; Penfield et al., 2001; Western et al., 2001; Johnson et al., 2002). It has been shown at the genetic and molecular levels in trichomes and root hairs", " addition to their defects in floral morphogenesis, lack differentiation past the growth phase of mucilage secretory\ncells (Jofuku et al., 1994; Western et al., 2001). TTG1 (TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1),  [CLS] TTG2, and GL2 (GLABRA2), which were originally identified through their role in trichome specification, have defects in both mucilage and columella\nproduction in the seed coat [CLS]  (Koornneef, 1981; Penfield et al., 2001; Western et al., 2001; Johnson et al., 2002). It has been shown at the genetic and molecular levels in trichomes and root hairs", " of reciprocal crosses in several crop species\nshowing that seed mass is often influenced by the genotype of the maternal plant (41). One interpretation of our result is that  [CLS] AP2 activity in maternal tissues, potentially including the seed coat [CLS] , is more important than its activity in the embryo and\nendosperm in controlling seed mass. Alternatively, because the maternal plant contributes two genome equivalents to the triploid\nendosperm, seed"]]
["seedev_train_220", [" [CLS] Arabidopsis seed coat epidermis undergoes a complex process of differentiation that includes the biosynthesis and secretion\nof large quantities of pectinaceous mucilage, cytoplasmic rearrangement, and secondary cell wall biosynthesis [CLS] . Mutations in\nMUM4 (MUCILAGE-MODIFIED4) lead to a decrease in seed coat mucilage and incomplete cytoplasmic rearrangement. We show that MUM4 encodes a putative NDP-l-rhamnose synthase, an enzyme required for", " [CLS] Arabidopsis seed coat epidermis undergoes a complex process of differentiation that includes the biosynthesis and secretion\nof large quantities of pectinaceous mucilage [CLS] , cytoplasmic rearrangement, and secondary cell wall biosynthesis. Mutations in\nMUM4 (MUCILAGE-MODIFIED4) lead to a decrease in seed coat mucilage and incomplete cytoplasmic rearrangement. We show that MUM4 encodes a", " [CLS] Arabidopsis seed coat epidermis undergoes a complex process of differentiation that includes the biosynthesis and secretion\nof large quantities of pectinaceous mucilage [CLS] , cytoplasmic rearrangement, and secondary cell wall biosynthesis. Mutations in\nMUM4 (MUCILAGE-MODIFIED4) lead to a decrease in seed coat mucilage and incomplete cytoplasmic rearrangement. We show that MUM4 encodes a"]]
["seedev_train_221", [" an altered columella. Expression studies\nshow that MUM4 is developmentally regulated during seed coat differentiation such that its transcript levels are increased at the time of\nmucilage production. Furthermore,  [CLS] MUM4 appears to be a downstream target of a cascade of transcription factors that includes AP2, TTG1 [CLS] , and GL2. These results demonstrate\nthe importance of mucilage production for the morphology of seed coat epidermal cells and suggest a regulatory framework for\nthe control of seed coat", " 1981; Penfield et al., 2001; Western et al., 2001; Johnson et al., 2002). It has been shown at the genetic and molecular levels in trichomes and root hairs that  [CLS] TTG1 interacts with a basic helix-loop-helix\n(bHLH) protein and a tissue-specific MYB protein to activate both GL2 and TTG2 [CLS]  (Payne et al., 2000; Johnson et al., 2002; Schiefelbein, 2003). Recently, mutations in MYB61 have been found to specifically affect both mucilage and columella production in the Arabidopsis seed", " 1981; Penfield et al., 2001; Western et al., 2001; Johnson et al., 2002). It has been shown at the genetic and molecular levels in trichomes and root hairs that  [CLS] TTG1 interacts with a basic helix-loop-helix\n(bHLH) protein and a tissue-specific MYB protein to activate both GL2 [CLS]  and TTG2 (Payne et al., 2000; Johnson et al., 2002; Schiefelbein, 2003). Recently, mutations in MYB61 have been found to specifically affect both mucilage and columella production in the"]]
["seedev_train_222", [" an altered columella. Expression studies\nshow that MUM4 is developmentally regulated during seed coat differentiation such that its transcript levels are increased at the time of\nmucilage production. Furthermore,  [CLS] MUM4 appears to be a downstream target of a cascade of transcription factors that includes AP2, TTG1, and GL2 [CLS] . These results demonstrate\nthe importance of mucilage production for the morphology of seed coat epidermal cells and suggest a regulatory framework for\nthe control of seed coat epidermal differentiation."]]
["seedev_train_223", [" an altered columella. Expression studies\nshow that MUM4 is developmentally regulated during seed coat differentiation such that its transcript levels are increased at the time of\nmucilage production. Furthermore,  [CLS] MUM4 appears to be a downstream target of a cascade of transcription factors that includes AP2 [CLS] , TTG1, and GL2. These results demonstrate\nthe importance of mucilage production for the morphology of seed coat epidermal cells and suggest a regulatory framework for\nthe control of seed", " expression was regulated by AP2 (Okamuro et al., 1997). Nevertheless, relationships between AtEBP and AP2 in ethylene signal transduction have not been investigated in detail.\nHere, we show that  [CLS] AP2 regulates ERF genes such as AtEBP [CLS]  and AtERF1, and the over-expression of AtEBP causes the accumulation of AP2 transcripts.\n", " It was clarified that AtEBP is regulated by EIN2, but not EIN3, suggesting that AtEBP expression is independently regulated under EIN3 in ethylene signalling. Interestingly, it was reported that  [CLS] AtEBP expression was regulated by AP2 [CLS]  (Okamuro et al., 1997). Nevertheless, relationships between AtEBP and AP2 in ethylene signal transduction have not been investigated in detail.\nHere, we show that AP2 regulates ERF genes such", " expression was regulated by AP2 (Okamuro et al., 1997). Nevertheless, relationships between AtEBP and AP2 in ethylene signal transduction have not been investigated in detail.\nHere, we show that  [CLS] AP2 regulates ERF genes such as AtEBP and AtERF1 [CLS] , and the over-expression of AtEBP causes the accumulation of AP2 transcripts.\n", " in both floral and whole-plant development.\nAP2 belongs to the AP2/EREBP family, one of the largest groups of plant transcriptional factors (Riechmann et al., 2000). It is known that  [CLS] AP2 suppresses expression of AGAMOUS [CLS] , the C gene of a floral homeotic gene (Drews et al., 1991; Bomblies et al., 1999). In addition, AP2 regulates the expression of ethylene-responsive factor (ERF) genes containing one", " the translation process (Aukerman and Sakai, 2003; Chen, 2004). However, the transcriptional regulation of AP2 has not been well understood (Okamuro et al., 1997).\nThe current study showed that  [CLS] AP2 activity repressed AtEBP [CLS] , AtERF1 and AP2 expression. This is consistent with previous results showing that AP2 regulates its own AP2 expression (Okamuro et al., 1997; Chen, 2004) as well as other genes,", " the translation process (Aukerman and Sakai, 2003; Chen, 2004). However, the transcriptional regulation of AP2 has not been well understood (Okamuro et al., 1997).\nThe current study showed that  [CLS] AP2 activity repressed AtEBP, AtERF1 and AP2 [CLS]  expression. This is consistent with previous results showing that AP2 regulates its own AP2 expression (Okamuro et al., 1997; Chen, 2004) as well as other genes, such as the", " not been well understood (Okamuro et al., 1997).\nThe current study showed that AP2 activity repressed AtEBP, AtERF1 and AP2 expression. This is consistent with previous results showing that  [CLS] AP2 regulates its own AP2 [CLS]  expression (Okamuro et al., 1997; Chen, 2004) as well as other genes, such as the ERF genes.\nIn addition, over-expression of AtEBP increased the expression level of AP2. AtEBP", " the translation process (Aukerman and Sakai, 2003; Chen, 2004). However, the transcriptional regulation of AP2 has not been well understood (Okamuro et al., 1997).\nThe current study showed that  [CLS] AP2 activity repressed AtEBP, AtERF1 [CLS]  and AP2 expression. This is consistent with previous results showing that AP2 regulates its own AP2 expression (Okamuro et al., 1997; Chen, 2004) as well as other genes, such", " [CLS] AP2 protein down-regulates AP2 [CLS]  and AtEBP expression (Okamuro et al., 1997; this study), as indicated in grey. In the current study, it was demonstrated that AP2 expression was regulated through AtEBP and EIN2,", " [CLS] AP2 protein down-regulates AP2 and AtEBP [CLS]  expression (Okamuro et al., 1997; this study), as indicated in grey. In the current study, it was demonstrated that AP2 expression was regulated through AtEBP and EIN2, and that"]]
["seedev_train_224", [" we demonstrate that MUM4 encodes a putative NDP-l-Rha synthase. Mutations in this gene lead to reduced mucilage in the seed coat and an altered columella. Expression studies\nshow that  [CLS] MUM4 is developmentally regulated during seed coat differentiation [CLS]  such that its transcript levels are increased at the time of\nmucilage production. Furthermore, MUM4 appears to be a downstream target of a cascade of transcription factors that includes"]]
["seedev_train_225", [" 1981; Penfield et al., 2001; Western et al., 2001; Johnson et al., 2002). It has been shown at the genetic and molecular levels in trichomes and root hairs that  [CLS] TTG1 interacts with a basic helix-loop-helix\n(bHLH) protein and a tissue-specific MYB [CLS]  protein to activate both GL2 and TTG2 (Payne et al., 2000; Johnson et al., 2002; Schiefelbein, 2003). Recently, mutations in MYB61 have been found to specifically affect both mucilage"]]
["seedev_train_226", [" 1981; Penfield et al., 2001; Western et al., 2001; Johnson et al., 2002). It has been shown at the genetic and molecular levels in trichomes and root hairs that  [CLS] TTG1 interacts with a basic helix-loop-helix\n(bHLH [CLS] ) protein and a tissue-specific MYB protein to activate both GL2 and TTG2 (Payne et al., 2000; Johnson et al., 2002; Schiefelbein, 2003). Recently, mutations in MYB61 have been found"]]
["seedev_train_227", [" their defects in floral morphogenesis, lack differentiation past the growth phase of mucilage secretory\ncells (Jofuku et al., 1994; Western et al., 2001). TTG1 (TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1), TTG2, and  [CLS] GL2 (GLABRA2), which were originally identified through their role in trichome specification, have defects in both mucilage and columella\nproduction [CLS]  in the seed coat (Koornneef, 1981; Penfield et al., 2001; Western et al., 2001; Johnson et al., 2002). It has been shown at the genetic and molecular levels in", " their defects in floral morphogenesis, lack differentiation past the growth phase of mucilage secretory\ncells (Jofuku et al., 1994; Western et al., 2001). TTG1 (TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1), TTG2, and  [CLS] GL2 (GLABRA2), which were originally identified through their role in trichome specification, have defects in both mucilage and columella\nproduction [CLS]  in the seed coat (Koornneef, 1981; Penfield et al., 2001; Western et al., 2001; Johnson et al., 2002). It has been shown at the genetic and molecular levels in", " their defects in floral morphogenesis, lack differentiation past the growth phase of mucilage secretory\ncells (Jofuku et al., 1994; Western et al., 2001). TTG1 (TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1), TTG2, and  [CLS] GL2 (GLABRA2), which were originally identified through their role in trichome specification [CLS] , have defects in both mucilage and columella\nproduction in the seed coat (Koornneef, 1981; Penfield et al., 2001; Western et al., 2001; Johnson et al., 2002). It has been"]]
["seedev_train_228", [" in AP2 (APETALA2), in addition to their defects in floral morphogenesis, lack differentiation past the growth phase of mucilage secretory\ncells (Jofuku et al., 1994; Western et al., 2001).  [CLS] TTG1 (TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1), TTG2, and GL2 (GLABRA2), which were originally identified through their role in trichome specification [CLS] , have defects in both mucilage and columella\nproduction in the seed coat (Koornneef, 1981; Penfield et al., 2001; Western et al., 2001; Johnson et al., 2002). It has been", " in AP2 (APETALA2), in addition to their defects in floral morphogenesis, lack differentiation past the growth phase of mucilage secretory\ncells (Jofuku et al., 1994; Western et al., 2001).  [CLS] TTG1 (TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1), TTG2, and GL2 (GLABRA2), which were originally identified through their role in trichome specification, have defects in both mucilage and columella\nproduction [CLS]  in the seed coat (Koornneef, 1981; Penfield et al., 2001; Western et al., 2001; Johnson et al., 2002). It has been shown at the genetic and molecular levels in", " in AP2 (APETALA2), in addition to their defects in floral morphogenesis, lack differentiation past the growth phase of mucilage secretory\ncells (Jofuku et al., 1994; Western et al., 2001).  [CLS] TTG1 (TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1), TTG2, and GL2 (GLABRA2), which were originally identified through their role in trichome specification, have defects in both mucilage and columella\nproduction [CLS]  in the seed coat (Koornneef, 1981; Penfield et al., 2001; Western et al., 2001; Johnson et al., 2002). It has been shown at the genetic and molecular levels in"]]
["seedev_train_229", [" addition to their defects in floral morphogenesis, lack differentiation past the growth phase of mucilage secretory\ncells (Jofuku et al., 1994; Western et al., 2001). TTG1 (TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1),  [CLS] TTG2, and GL2 (GLABRA2), which were originally identified through their role in trichome specification, have defects in both mucilage and columella\nproduction [CLS]  in the seed coat (Koornneef, 1981; Penfield et al., 2001; Western et al., 2001; Johnson et al., 2002). It has been shown at the genetic and molecular levels in", " addition to their defects in floral morphogenesis, lack differentiation past the growth phase of mucilage secretory\ncells (Jofuku et al., 1994; Western et al., 2001). TTG1 (TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1),  [CLS] TTG2, and GL2 (GLABRA2), which were originally identified through their role in trichome specification, have defects in both mucilage and columella\nproduction [CLS]  in the seed coat (Koornneef, 1981; Penfield et al., 2001; Western et al., 2001; Johnson et al., 2002). It has been shown at the genetic and molecular levels in", " addition to their defects in floral morphogenesis, lack differentiation past the growth phase of mucilage secretory\ncells (Jofuku et al., 1994; Western et al., 2001). TTG1 (TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1),  [CLS] TTG2, and GL2 (GLABRA2), which were originally identified through their role in trichome specification [CLS] , have defects in both mucilage and columella\nproduction in the seed coat (Koornneef, 1981; Penfield et al., 2001; Western et al., 2001; Johnson et al., 2002). It has been"]]
["seedev_train_230", [" interacts with a basic helix-loop-helix\n(bHLH) protein and a tissue-specific MYB protein to activate both GL2 and TTG2 (Payne et al., 2000; Johnson et al., 2002; Schiefelbein, 2003). Recently,  [CLS] mutations in MYB61 have been found to specifically affect both mucilage and columella production [CLS]  in the Arabidopsis seed coat (Penfield et al., 2001).\nThe objective of this study was to characterize the role of MUM4 in the development of the Arabidopsis seed coat.", " interacts with a basic helix-loop-helix\n(bHLH) protein and a tissue-specific MYB protein to activate both GL2 and TTG2 (Payne et al., 2000; Johnson et al., 2002; Schiefelbein, 2003). Recently,  [CLS] mutations in MYB61 have been found to specifically affect both mucilage and columella production [CLS]  in the Arabidopsis seed coat (Penfield et al., 2001).\nThe objective of this study was to characterize the role of MUM4 in the development of the Arabidopsis seed coat."]]
["seedev_train_231", [" cells of the Arabidopsis seed coat is part of a coordinated developmental process\nthat begins with cell growth, followed by biosynthesis and polar secretion of large quantities of pectin,  [CLS] formation of a cytoplasmic\ncolumn through cytoplasmic constriction [CLS]  and vacuolar contraction, and, finally, the synthesis of a secondary cell wall (columella;\nBeeckman et al., 2000; Western et al., 2000; Windsor et al., 2000). Seed coat mucilage is"]]
["seedev_train_232", [" mum (mucilage-modified) mutants affecting mucilage production can be identified by a simple screening method (Western et al., 2001). Mutations in one of these genes, MUM4, yield a phenotype where  [CLS] mucilage is not released from hydrated mature seeds [CLS] .\nSeveral genes encoding putative transcription factors have been implicated in seed coat epidermal development because mutations\nin these genes result in seeds that fail to release mucilage upon hydration."]]
["seedev_train_233", [" cells of the Arabidopsis seed coat is part of a coordinated developmental process\nthat begins with cell growth, followed by biosynthesis and polar secretion of large quantities of pectin,  [CLS] formation of a cytoplasmic\ncolumn through cytoplasmic constriction and vacuolar contraction [CLS] , and, finally, the synthesis of a secondary cell wall (columella;\nBeeckman et al., 2000; Western et al., 2000; Windsor et al., 2000). Seed coat mucilage is dispensable under laboratory"]]
["seedev_train_234", ["\nSeveral genes encoding putative transcription factors have been implicated in seed coat epidermal development because mutations\nin these genes result in seeds that fail to release mucilage upon hydration.  [CLS] Mutants in AP2 (APETALA2), in addition to their defects in floral morphogenesis [CLS] , lack differentiation past the growth phase of mucilage secretory\ncells (Jofuku et al., 1994; Western et al., 2001). TTG1 (TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1), TTG2, and GL2 (GLABRA2), which were originally", "\nSeveral genes encoding putative transcription factors have been implicated in seed coat epidermal development because mutations\nin these genes result in seeds that fail to release mucilage upon hydration.  [CLS] Mutants in AP2 (APETALA2), in addition to their defects in floral morphogenesis, lack differentiation past the growth phase of mucilage secretory\ncells [CLS]  (Jofuku et al., 1994; Western et al., 2001). TTG1 (TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1), TTG2, and GL2 (GLABRA2), which were originally identified through their role in trichome specification, have defects in"]]
["seedev_train_235", [" from hydrated mature seeds.\nSeveral genes encoding putative transcription factors have been implicated in seed coat epidermal development because mutations\nin these genes result in seeds that fail to  [CLS] release mucilage upon hydration [CLS] . Mutants in AP2 (APETALA2), in addition to their defects in floral morphogenesis, lack differentiation past the growth phase of mucilage secretory\ncells (Jofuku et al., 1994; Western et al.,"]]
["seedev_train_236", [" of a secondary cell wall (columella;\nBeeckman et al., 2000; Western et al., 2000; Windsor et al., 2000). Seed coat mucilage is dispensable under laboratory conditions in Arabidopsis and  [CLS] mum (mucilage-modified) mutants affecting mucilage production [CLS]  can be identified by a simple screening method (Western et al., 2001). Mutations in one of these genes, MUM4, yield a phenotype where mucilage is not released from hydrated"]]
["seedev_train_237", [" [CLS] production of mucilage in the epidermal cells of the Arabidopsis seed coat [CLS]  is part of a coordinated developmental process\nthat begins with cell growth, followed by biosynthesis and polar secretion of large quantities of pectin, formation of a cytoplasmic\ncolumn through"]]
["seedev_train_238", ["\ncolumn through cytoplasmic constriction and vacuolar contraction, and, finally, the synthesis of a secondary cell wall (columella;\nBeeckman et al., 2000; Western et al., 2000; Windsor et al., 2000).  [CLS] Seed coat mucilage [CLS]  is dispensable under laboratory conditions in Arabidopsis and mum (mucilage-modified) mutants affecting mucilage production can be identified by a simple screening method (Western et al., 2001). Mutations in one"]]
["seedev_train_239", [" 2001; Western et al., 2001; Johnson et al., 2002). It has been shown at the genetic and molecular levels in trichomes and root hairs that TTG1 interacts with a  [CLS] basic helix-loop-helix\n(bHLH [CLS] ) protein and a tissue-specific MYB protein to activate both GL2 and TTG2 (Payne et al., 2000; Johnson et al., 2002; Schiefelbein, 2003). Recently, mutations in MYB61 have been found"]]
["seedev_train_240", [" we demonstrate that MUM4 encodes a putative NDP-l-Rha synthase. Mutations in this gene lead to reduced mucilage in the seed coat and an altered columella. Expression studies\nshow that  [CLS] MUM4 is developmentally regulated during seed coat differentiation such that its transcript levels are increased at the time of\nmucilage production [CLS] . Furthermore, MUM4 appears to be a downstream target of a cascade of transcription factors that includes AP2, TTG1, and GL2. These results demonstrate\nthe importance of mucilage production for"]]
["seedev_train_241", [" in the seed coat (Koornneef, 1981; Penfield et al., 2001; Western et al., 2001; Johnson et al., 2002). It has been shown at the genetic and molecular levels in  [CLS] trichomes and root hairs that TTG1 [CLS]  interacts with a basic helix-loop-helix\n(bHLH) protein and a tissue-specific MYB protein to activate both GL2 and TTG2 (Payne et al., 2000; Johnson et al., 2002; Schiefelbein, 2003). Recently,", " seed coat (Koornneef, 1981; Penfield et al., 2001; Western et al., 2001; Johnson et al., 2002). It has been shown at the genetic and molecular levels in trichomes and  [CLS] root hairs that TTG1 [CLS]  interacts with a basic helix-loop-helix\n(bHLH) protein and a tissue-specific MYB protein to activate both GL2 and TTG2 (Payne et al., 2000; Johnson et al., 2002; Schiefelbein, 2003). Recently,"]]
["seedev_train_242", [" in the seed coat (Koornneef, 1981; Penfield et al., 2001; Western et al., 2001; Johnson et al., 2002). It has been shown at the genetic and molecular levels in  [CLS] trichomes and root hairs that TTG1 interacts with a basic helix-loop-helix\n(bHLH) protein and a tissue-specific MYB protein to activate both GL2 [CLS]  and TTG2 (Payne et al., 2000; Johnson et al., 2002; Schiefelbein, 2003). Recently, mutations in MYB61 have been found to specifically affect both mucilage and columella production in the", " in the seed coat (Koornneef, 1981; Penfield et al., 2001; Western et al., 2001; Johnson et al., 2002). It has been shown at the genetic and molecular levels in  [CLS] trichomes and root hairs that TTG1 interacts with a basic helix-loop-helix\n(bHLH) protein and a tissue-specific MYB protein to activate both GL2 and TTG2 [CLS]  (Payne et al., 2000; Johnson et al., 2002; Schiefelbein, 2003). Recently, mutations in MYB61 have been found to specifically affect both mucilage and columella production in the Arabidopsis seed"]]
["seedev_train_243", [" seed coat (Koornneef, 1981; Penfield et al., 2001; Western et al., 2001; Johnson et al., 2002). It has been shown at the genetic and molecular levels in trichomes and  [CLS] root hairs that TTG1 interacts with a basic helix-loop-helix\n(bHLH) protein and a tissue-specific MYB protein to activate both GL2 and TTG2 [CLS]  (Payne et al., 2000; Johnson et al., 2002; Schiefelbein, 2003). Recently, mutations in MYB61 have been found to specifically affect both mucilage and columella production in the Arabidopsis seed", " seed coat (Koornneef, 1981; Penfield et al., 2001; Western et al., 2001; Johnson et al., 2002). It has been shown at the genetic and molecular levels in trichomes and  [CLS] root hairs that TTG1 interacts with a basic helix-loop-helix\n(bHLH) protein and a tissue-specific MYB protein to activate both GL2 [CLS]  and TTG2 (Payne et al., 2000; Johnson et al., 2002; Schiefelbein, 2003). Recently, mutations in MYB61 have been found to specifically affect both mucilage and columella production in the"]]
["seedev_train_244", [" to activate both GL2 and TTG2 (Payne et al., 2000; Johnson et al., 2002; Schiefelbein, 2003). Recently, mutations in MYB61 have been found to specifically affect both mucilage and  [CLS] columella production in the Arabidopsis seed coat [CLS]  (Penfield et al., 2001).\nThe objective of this study was to characterize the role of MUM4 in the development of the Arabidopsis seed coat. Using positional cloning of MUM4,", " MYB protein to activate both GL2 and TTG2 (Payne et al., 2000; Johnson et al., 2002; Schiefelbein, 2003). Recently, mutations in MYB61 have been found to specifically affect both  [CLS] mucilage and columella production in the Arabidopsis seed coat [CLS]  (Penfield et al., 2001).\nThe objective of this study was to characterize the role of MUM4 in the development of the Arabidopsis seed coat. Using positional cloning of MUM4,"]]
["seedev_train_245", [" secretory\ncells (Jofuku et al., 1994; Western et al., 2001). TTG1 (TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1), TTG2, and GL2 (GLABRA2), which were originally identified through their role in trichome specification, have  [CLS] defects in both mucilage and columella\nproduction in the seed coat [CLS]  (Koornneef, 1981; Penfield et al., 2001; Western et al., 2001; Johnson et al., 2002). It has been shown at the genetic and molecular levels in trichomes and root hairs", " secretory\ncells (Jofuku et al., 1994; Western et al., 2001). TTG1 (TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1), TTG2, and GL2 (GLABRA2), which were originally identified through their role in trichome specification, have  [CLS] defects in both mucilage and columella\nproduction in the seed coat [CLS]  (Koornneef, 1981; Penfield et al., 2001; Western et al., 2001; Johnson et al., 2002). It has been shown at the genetic and molecular levels in trichomes and root hairs", " the maternal component of the seed is defective in ap2 mutants.\nAP2, Seed Mass, and Soluble Sugar Metabolism. Our findings that the ap2 mutation acts maternally, potentially through the  [CLS] seed coat, to control seed mass [CLS]  (Table 3) and affects soluble sugar metabolism during seed development (Fig. 4) provide a potential explanation for the increase in embryo cell number in ap2 mutant seeds (Table 4).", " finding that AP2 acts maternally to affect embryo cell size may indicate that it operates through a mechanism that was not uncovered by studies\nof natural ecotype variations.\nThe  [CLS] seed coat has been implicated to influence seed mass [CLS] . For example, sporophytic mutations in cereals that affect development\nof a specialized seed coat tissue responsible for nutrient transfer to the endosperm cause defects in seed development and\nsize"]]
["seedev_train_246", [" mucilage is not released from hydrated mature seeds.\nSeveral genes encoding putative transcription factors have been implicated in seed coat epidermal development because mutations\nin these genes result in  [CLS] seeds that fail to release mucilage [CLS]  upon hydration. Mutants in AP2 (APETALA2), in addition to their defects in floral morphogenesis, lack differentiation past the growth phase of mucilage secretory\ncells (Jofuku et al., 1994; Western", " phase appear to correlate with\nchanges in hexose and sucrose levels.\nap2 mutations induced changes in the levels of hexose and sucrose in developing seeds. These changes resulted in  [CLS] hexose/sucrose\nratios that reached a higher maximal level in ap2 mutant seeds compared with wild-type seeds [CLS]  and that remained high for a longer period of seed development in ap2 mutants than they did in wild type (Fig. 4). For example, hexose/sucrose ratios remained high at", " phase appear to correlate with\nchanges in hexose and sucrose levels.\nap2 mutations induced changes in the levels of hexose and sucrose in developing seeds. These changes resulted in  [CLS] hexose/sucrose\nratios that reached a higher maximal level in ap2 mutant seeds [CLS]  compared with wild-type seeds and that remained high for a longer period of seed development in ap2 mutants than they did in wild type (Fig. 4). For example, hexose/sucrose"]]
["seedev_train_247", [" mucilage using antibodies and gas chromatography have demonstrated a significant reduction in RGI and its composite backbone\nmonosaccharides Rha and GalUA in comparison with wild-type seeds. Second, cloning of  [CLS] MUM4 revealed a putative protein containing similarity to bacterial nucleotide sugar interconversion enzymes, suggesting that\nit, too, is required for the production of activated sugars [CLS] . The N-terminal portion of MUM4 is most similar to bacterial dTDP-d-Glc 4,6-dehydratases, the first of three enzymes required for the conversion of dTDP-d-Glc to dTDP-l-Rha (Tonetti et al., 1998)."]]
["seedev_train_248", [" also a C-terminal domain with some similarity to 4-reductases (this study; Reiter and Vanzin, 2001). There is a precedent in Arabidopsis for a bifunctional 3,5 epimerase, 4-reductase in the  [CLS] synthesis of GDP-l-Fuc from GDP-d-Man (GER1 [CLS] , GER2) (Bonin and Reiter, 2000). Therefore, based on sequence analysis, it is attractive to postulate a single, multifunctional protein acting in the conversion\nof NDP-d-Glc to NDP-l-Rha in Arabidopsis"]]
["seedev_train_249", [" gene family consisting of three genes (RHM1, MUM4/RHM2, and RHM3; Reiter and Vanzin, 2001) that exhibit high identity at both nucleotide and amino acid levels. The ubiquitous expression of  [CLS] RHM1 and RHM3 can be postulated to provide a mechanism for the formation of the normal primary cell wall in mum4 mutants and the residual mucilage [CLS]  present in mum4 seed coats. Redundancy in genes coding for putative NDP-l-Rha synthases is unsurprising because of the importance of the Rha-containing pectins RGI and RGII in primary cell", " gene family consisting of three genes (RHM1, MUM4/RHM2, and RHM3; Reiter and Vanzin, 2001) that exhibit high identity at both nucleotide and amino acid levels. The ubiquitous expression of  [CLS] RHM1 and RHM3 can be postulated to provide a mechanism for the formation of the normal primary cell wall [CLS]  in mum4 mutants and the residual mucilage present in mum4 seed coats. Redundancy in genes coding for putative NDP-l-Rha synthases is unsurprising because of the importance of the Rha-containing"]]
["seedev_train_250", [" cannot be ruled out without evidence of enzymatic activity in the conversion\nof NDP-d-Glc to NDP-l-Rha.\nGram-negative bacteria such as Escherichia coli encode three separate enzymes (4,6-dehydratase, 3,5-epimerase, and  [CLS] 4-reductase) to convert dTDP-d-Glc to dTDP-l-Rha [CLS]  (Tonetti et al., 1998). The putative MUM4 protein not only contains an N-terminal domain with similarity to the bacterial dTDP-d-Glc 4,6-dehydratases but also a C-terminal domain with some similarity"]]
["seedev_train_251", [" RGI biosynthesis cannot be ruled out without evidence of enzymatic activity in the conversion\nof NDP-d-Glc to NDP-l-Rha.\nGram-negative bacteria such as Escherichia coli encode three separate enzymes (4,6-dehydratase,  [CLS] 3,5-epimerase, and 4-reductase) to convert dTDP-d-Glc to dTDP-l-Rha [CLS]  (Tonetti et al., 1998). The putative MUM4 protein not only contains an N-terminal domain with similarity to the bacterial dTDP-d-Glc 4,6-dehydratases but also a C-terminal domain with some similarity"]]
["seedev_train_252", [" the bacterial dTDP-d-Glc 4,6-dehydratases but also a C-terminal domain with some similarity to 4-reductases (this study; Reiter and Vanzin, 2001). There is a precedent in Arabidopsis for a bifunctional  [CLS] 3,5 epimerase, 4-reductase in the synthesis of GDP-l-Fuc from GDP-d-Man [CLS]  (GER1, GER2) (Bonin and Reiter, 2000). Therefore, based on sequence analysis, it is attractive to postulate a single, multifunctional protein acting in the conversion\nof NDP-d-Glc to NDP-l-Rha in"]]
["seedev_train_253", [" consisting of three genes (RHM1, MUM4/RHM2, and RHM3; Reiter and Vanzin, 2001) that exhibit high identity at both nucleotide and amino acid levels. The ubiquitous expression of RHM1 and  [CLS] RHM3 can be postulated to provide a mechanism for the formation of the normal primary cell wall [CLS]  in mum4 mutants and the residual mucilage present in mum4 seed coats. Redundancy in genes coding for putative NDP-l-Rha synthases is unsurprising because of the importance of the Rha-containing", " consisting of three genes (RHM1, MUM4/RHM2, and RHM3; Reiter and Vanzin, 2001) that exhibit high identity at both nucleotide and amino acid levels. The ubiquitous expression of RHM1 and  [CLS] RHM3 can be postulated to provide a mechanism for the formation of the normal primary cell wall in mum4 mutants and the residual mucilage [CLS]  present in mum4 seed coats. Redundancy in genes coding for putative NDP-l-Rha synthases is unsurprising because of the importance of the Rha-containing pectins RGI and RGII in primary cell"]]
["seedev_train_254", [" most similar to bacterial dTDP-d-Glc 4,6-dehydratases, the first of three enzymes required for the conversion of dTDP-d-Glc to dTDP-l-Rha (Tonetti et al., 1998). These data favor a role for  [CLS] MUM4 in the synthesis of NDP-l-Rha [CLS] , a key step in the production of RGI. A reverse genetics approach taken by another group has come to a similar conclusion\nregarding the putative enzymatic function of MUM4"]]
["seedev_train_255", [" also a C-terminal domain with some similarity to 4-reductases (this study; Reiter and Vanzin, 2001). There is a precedent in Arabidopsis for a bifunctional 3,5 epimerase, 4-reductase in the  [CLS] synthesis of GDP-l-Fuc from GDP-d-Man (GER1, GER2 [CLS] ) (Bonin and Reiter, 2000). Therefore, based on sequence analysis, it is attractive to postulate a single, multifunctional protein acting in the conversion\nof NDP-d-Glc to NDP-l-Rha in Arabidopsis (Reiter"]]
["seedev_train_256", [" in RGI biosynthesis cannot be ruled out without evidence of enzymatic activity in the conversion\nof NDP-d-Glc to NDP-l-Rha.\nGram-negative bacteria such as Escherichia coli encode three separate enzymes ( [CLS] 4,6-dehydratase, 3,5-epimerase, and 4-reductase) to convert dTDP-d-Glc to dTDP-l-Rha [CLS]  (Tonetti et al., 1998). The putative MUM4 protein not only contains an N-terminal domain with similarity to the bacterial dTDP-d-Glc 4,6-dehydratases but also a C-terminal domain with some similarity"]]
["seedev_train_257", [" similarity to bacterial nucleotide sugar interconversion enzymes, suggesting that\nit, too, is required for the production of activated sugars. The N-terminal portion of MUM4 is most similar to bacterial  [CLS] dTDP-d-Glc 4,6-dehydratases, the first of three enzymes required for the conversion of dTDP-d-Glc to dTDP-l-Rha [CLS]  (Tonetti et al., 1998). These data favor a role for MUM4 in the synthesis of NDP-l-Rha, a key step in the production of RGI. A reverse genetics approach taken"]]
["seedev_train_258", [" levels. The ubiquitous expression of RHM1 and RHM3 can be postulated to provide a mechanism for the formation of the normal primary cell wall in mum4 mutants and the  [CLS] residual mucilage present in mum4 seed coats [CLS] . Redundancy in genes coding for putative NDP-l-Rha synthases is unsurprising because of the importance of the Rha-containing pectins RGI and RGII in primary cell walls.\nIn fact, the presence"]]
["seedev_train_259", [" [CLS] MUM4 encodes an enzyme involved in RGI biosynthesis [CLS] . First, analysis of mum4 mucilage using antibodies and gas chromatography have demonstrated a significant reduction in RGI and its composite backbone\nmonosaccharides Rha and GalUA in comparison with wild-type"]]
["seedev_train_260", [" step in the production of RGI. A reverse genetics approach taken by another group has come to a similar conclusion\nregarding the putative enzymatic function of MUM4 (also designated  [CLS] RHM2 [RHAMNOSE BIOSYNTHESIS 2 [CLS] ]; B. Usadel et al., 2004). However, another role in RGI biosynthesis cannot be ruled out without evidence of enzymatic activity in the conversion\nof NDP-d-Glc to NDP-l-Rha.\nGram-negative bacteria", " protein acting in the conversion\nof NDP-d-Glc to NDP-l-Rha in Arabidopsis (Reiter and Vanzin, 2001).\nMUM4 is a member of a small gene family consisting of three genes (RHM1,  [CLS] MUM4/RHM2 [CLS] , and RHM3; Reiter and Vanzin, 2001) that exhibit high identity at both nucleotide and amino acid levels. The ubiquitous expression of RHM1 and RHM3 can be postulated to provide"]]
["seedev_train_261", [" multifunctional protein acting in the conversion\nof NDP-d-Glc to NDP-l-Rha in Arabidopsis (Reiter and Vanzin, 2001).\nMUM4 is a member of a small gene family consisting of three genes ( [CLS] RHM1, MUM4/RHM2, and RHM3 [CLS] ; Reiter and Vanzin, 2001) that exhibit high identity at both nucleotide and amino acid levels. The ubiquitous expression of RHM1 and RHM3 can be postulated to provide a mechanism"]]
["seedev_train_262", [" NDP-l-Rha, a key step in the production of RGI. A reverse genetics approach taken by another group has come to a similar conclusion\nregarding the putative enzymatic function of  [CLS] MUM4 (also designated RHM2 [CLS]  [RHAMNOSE BIOSYNTHESIS 2]; B. Usadel et al., 2004). However, another role in RGI biosynthesis cannot be ruled out without evidence of enzymatic activity in the conversion\nof NDP-d-Glc to"]]
["seedev_train_263", [" the bacterial dTDP-d-Glc 4,6-dehydratases but also a C-terminal domain with some similarity to 4-reductases (this study; Reiter and Vanzin, 2001). There is a precedent in Arabidopsis for a bifunctional  [CLS] 3,5 epimerase, 4-reductase in the synthesis of GDP-l-Fuc from GDP-d-Man (GER1 [CLS] , GER2) (Bonin and Reiter, 2000). Therefore, based on sequence analysis, it is attractive to postulate a single, multifunctional protein acting in the conversion\nof NDP-d-Glc to NDP-l-Rha in Arabidopsis"]]
["seedev_train_264", [" the bacterial dTDP-d-Glc 4,6-dehydratases but also a C-terminal domain with some similarity to 4-reductases (this study; Reiter and Vanzin, 2001). There is a precedent in Arabidopsis for a bifunctional  [CLS] 3,5 epimerase, 4-reductase in the synthesis of GDP-l-Fuc from GDP-d-Man (GER1, GER2 [CLS] ) (Bonin and Reiter, 2000). Therefore, based on sequence analysis, it is attractive to postulate a single, multifunctional protein acting in the conversion\nof NDP-d-Glc to NDP-l-Rha in Arabidopsis (Reiter"]]
["seedev_train_265", [" levels. The ubiquitous expression of RHM1 and RHM3 can be postulated to provide a mechanism for the formation of the normal primary cell wall in mum4 mutants and the  [CLS] residual mucilage present in mum4 [CLS]  seed coats. Redundancy in genes coding for putative NDP-l-Rha synthases is unsurprising because of the importance of the Rha-containing pectins RGI and RGII in primary cell walls.\nIn fact,"]]
["seedev_train_266", [" BIOSYNTHESIS 2]; B. Usadel et al., 2004). However, another role in RGI biosynthesis cannot be ruled out without evidence of enzymatic activity in the conversion\nof NDP-d-Glc to NDP-l-Rha.\n [CLS] Gram-negative bacteria such as Escherichia coli encode three separate enzymes (4,6-dehydratase, 3,5-epimerase, and 4-reductase [CLS] ) to convert dTDP-d-Glc to dTDP-l-Rha (Tonetti et al., 1998). The putative MUM4 protein not only contains an N-terminal domain with similarity to the bacterial dTDP-d-Glc 4,6-dehydratases but also a", " et al., 2004). However, another role in RGI biosynthesis cannot be ruled out without evidence of enzymatic activity in the conversion\nof NDP-d-Glc to NDP-l-Rha.\nGram-negative bacteria such as  [CLS] Escherichia coli encode three separate enzymes (4,6-dehydratase, 3,5-epimerase, and 4-reductase [CLS] ) to convert dTDP-d-Glc to dTDP-l-Rha (Tonetti et al., 1998). The putative MUM4 protein not only contains an N-terminal domain with similarity to the bacterial dTDP-d-Glc 4,6-dehydratases but also a"]]
["seedev_train_267", [" domain with similarity to the bacterial dTDP-d-Glc 4,6-dehydratases but also a C-terminal domain with some similarity to 4-reductases (this study; Reiter and Vanzin, 2001). There is a precedent in  [CLS] Arabidopsis for a bifunctional 3,5 epimerase, 4-reductase in the synthesis of GDP-l-Fuc from GDP-d-Man (GER1 [CLS] , GER2) (Bonin and Reiter, 2000). Therefore, based on sequence analysis, it is attractive to postulate a single, multifunctional protein acting in the conversion\nof NDP-d-Glc to NDP-l-Rha in Arabidopsis"]]
["seedev_train_268", [" BIOSYNTHESIS 2]; B. Usadel et al., 2004). However, another role in RGI biosynthesis cannot be ruled out without evidence of enzymatic activity in the conversion\nof NDP-d-Glc to NDP-l-Rha.\n [CLS] Gram-negative bacteria such as Escherichia coli encode three separate enzymes (4,6-dehydratase [CLS] , 3,5-epimerase, and 4-reductase) to convert dTDP-d-Glc to dTDP-l-Rha (Tonetti et al., 1998). The putative MUM4 protein not only contains an N-terminal domain with similarity to the bacterial dTDP-d-Glc 4,6-dehydratases", " et al., 2004). However, another role in RGI biosynthesis cannot be ruled out without evidence of enzymatic activity in the conversion\nof NDP-d-Glc to NDP-l-Rha.\nGram-negative bacteria such as  [CLS] Escherichia coli encode three separate enzymes (4,6-dehydratase [CLS] , 3,5-epimerase, and 4-reductase) to convert dTDP-d-Glc to dTDP-l-Rha (Tonetti et al., 1998). The putative MUM4 protein not only contains an N-terminal domain with similarity to the bacterial dTDP-d-Glc 4,6-dehydratases"]]
["seedev_train_269", [" gene family consisting of three genes (RHM1, MUM4/RHM2, and RHM3; Reiter and Vanzin, 2001) that exhibit high identity at both nucleotide and amino acid levels. The ubiquitous expression of  [CLS] RHM1 and RHM3 can be postulated to provide a mechanism for the formation of the normal primary cell wall in mum4 mutants and the residual mucilage present in mum4 [CLS]  seed coats. Redundancy in genes coding for putative NDP-l-Rha synthases is unsurprising because of the importance of the Rha-containing pectins RGI and RGII in primary cell walls.\nIn fact,", " gene family consisting of three genes (RHM1, MUM4/RHM2, and RHM3; Reiter and Vanzin, 2001) that exhibit high identity at both nucleotide and amino acid levels. The ubiquitous expression of  [CLS] RHM1 and RHM3 can be postulated to provide a mechanism for the formation of the normal primary cell wall in mum4 [CLS]  mutants and the residual mucilage present in mum4 seed coats. Redundancy in genes coding for putative NDP-l-Rha synthases is unsurprising because of the importance of the Rha-containing pectins RGI"]]
["seedev_train_270", [" BIOSYNTHESIS 2]; B. Usadel et al., 2004). However, another role in RGI biosynthesis cannot be ruled out without evidence of enzymatic activity in the conversion\nof NDP-d-Glc to NDP-l-Rha.\n [CLS] Gram-negative bacteria such as Escherichia coli encode three separate enzymes (4,6-dehydratase, 3,5-epimerase [CLS] , and 4-reductase) to convert dTDP-d-Glc to dTDP-l-Rha (Tonetti et al., 1998). The putative MUM4 protein not only contains an N-terminal domain with similarity to the bacterial dTDP-d-Glc 4,6-dehydratases but", " et al., 2004). However, another role in RGI biosynthesis cannot be ruled out without evidence of enzymatic activity in the conversion\nof NDP-d-Glc to NDP-l-Rha.\nGram-negative bacteria such as  [CLS] Escherichia coli encode three separate enzymes (4,6-dehydratase, 3,5-epimerase [CLS] , and 4-reductase) to convert dTDP-d-Glc to dTDP-l-Rha (Tonetti et al., 1998). The putative MUM4 protein not only contains an N-terminal domain with similarity to the bacterial dTDP-d-Glc 4,6-dehydratases but"]]
["seedev_train_271", [" domain with similarity to the bacterial dTDP-d-Glc 4,6-dehydratases but also a C-terminal domain with some similarity to 4-reductases (this study; Reiter and Vanzin, 2001). There is a precedent in  [CLS] Arabidopsis for a bifunctional 3,5 epimerase, 4-reductase [CLS]  in the synthesis of GDP-l-Fuc from GDP-d-Man (GER1, GER2) (Bonin and Reiter, 2000). Therefore, based on sequence analysis, it is attractive to postulate a single, multifunctional protein acting in"]]
["seedev_train_272", [" consisting of three genes (RHM1, MUM4/RHM2, and RHM3; Reiter and Vanzin, 2001) that exhibit high identity at both nucleotide and amino acid levels. The ubiquitous expression of RHM1 and  [CLS] RHM3 can be postulated to provide a mechanism for the formation of the normal primary cell wall in mum4 [CLS]  mutants and the residual mucilage present in mum4 seed coats. Redundancy in genes coding for putative NDP-l-Rha synthases is unsurprising because of the importance of the Rha-containing pectins RGI", " consisting of three genes (RHM1, MUM4/RHM2, and RHM3; Reiter and Vanzin, 2001) that exhibit high identity at both nucleotide and amino acid levels. The ubiquitous expression of RHM1 and  [CLS] RHM3 can be postulated to provide a mechanism for the formation of the normal primary cell wall in mum4 mutants and the residual mucilage present in mum4 [CLS]  seed coats. Redundancy in genes coding for putative NDP-l-Rha synthases is unsurprising because of the importance of the Rha-containing pectins RGI and RGII in primary cell walls.\nIn fact,"]]
["seedev_train_273", [" domain with similarity to the bacterial dTDP-d-Glc 4,6-dehydratases but also a C-terminal domain with some similarity to 4-reductases (this study; Reiter and Vanzin, 2001). There is a precedent in  [CLS] Arabidopsis for a bifunctional 3,5 epimerase, 4-reductase in the synthesis of GDP-l-Fuc from GDP-d-Man (GER1, GER2 [CLS] ) (Bonin and Reiter, 2000). Therefore, based on sequence analysis, it is attractive to postulate a single, multifunctional protein acting in the conversion\nof NDP-d-Glc to NDP-l-Rha in Arabidopsis (Reiter"]]
["seedev_train_274", [" containing similarity to bacterial nucleotide sugar interconversion enzymes, suggesting that\nit, too, is required for the production of activated sugars. The N-terminal portion of MUM4 is most similar to  [CLS] bacterial dTDP-d-Glc 4,6-dehydratases [CLS] , the first of three enzymes required for the conversion of dTDP-d-Glc to dTDP-l-Rha (Tonetti et al., 1998). These data favor a role for MUM4 in the synthesis of NDP-l-Rha,"]]
["seedev_train_275", [" BIOSYNTHESIS 2]; B. Usadel et al., 2004). However, another role in RGI biosynthesis cannot be ruled out without evidence of enzymatic activity in the conversion\nof NDP-d-Glc to NDP-l-Rha.\n [CLS] Gram-negative bacteria such as Escherichia coli encode three separate enzymes (4,6-dehydratase, 3,5-epimerase, and 4-reductase) to convert dTDP-d-Glc to dTDP-l-Rha [CLS]  (Tonetti et al., 1998). The putative MUM4 protein not only contains an N-terminal domain with similarity to the bacterial dTDP-d-Glc 4,6-dehydratases but also a C-terminal domain with some similarity"]]
["seedev_train_276", [" et al., 2004). However, another role in RGI biosynthesis cannot be ruled out without evidence of enzymatic activity in the conversion\nof NDP-d-Glc to NDP-l-Rha.\nGram-negative bacteria such as  [CLS] Escherichia coli encode three separate enzymes (4,6-dehydratase, 3,5-epimerase, and 4-reductase) to convert dTDP-d-Glc to dTDP-l-Rha [CLS]  (Tonetti et al., 1998). The putative MUM4 protein not only contains an N-terminal domain with similarity to the bacterial dTDP-d-Glc 4,6-dehydratases but also a C-terminal domain with some similarity"]]
["seedev_train_277", [" containing similarity to bacterial nucleotide sugar interconversion enzymes, suggesting that\nit, too, is required for the production of activated sugars. The N-terminal portion of MUM4 is most similar to  [CLS] bacterial dTDP-d-Glc 4,6-dehydratases, the first of three enzymes required for the conversion of dTDP-d-Glc to dTDP-l-Rha [CLS]  (Tonetti et al., 1998). These data favor a role for MUM4 in the synthesis of NDP-l-Rha, a key step in the production of RGI. A reverse genetics approach taken"]]
["seedev_train_278", [" [CLS] AP2 Activity Controls Seed Mass [CLS] .\nAP2 was identified originally as a homeotic gene required for the specification of floral organ identity and was shown to encode\nan AP2/EREBP transcription factor (24, 25). Here, we", " seed cell number both in fava bean cultivars that exhibit variations in seed size and in the maize miniature1 mutant that is defective in the enzyme (15, 53). Thus,  [CLS] AP2 may affect seed mass [CLS]  by controlling cell-wall-bound invertase activity.\nWe note that two other members of the AP2/EREBP transcription factor family have roles that appear to intersect with those\nof AP2. Mutations in", " coat, is more important than its activity in the embryo and\nendosperm in controlling seed mass. Alternatively, because the maternal plant contributes two genome equivalents to the triploid\nendosperm,  [CLS] seed mass may be affected by AP2 [CLS]  gene dosage in the endosperm. A QTL analysis of small- and large-seeded Arabidopsis ecotypes suggests that maternal tissues are important in determining seed mass (13). A number of QTL", " [CLS] AP2 was identified originally as a homeotic gene required for the specification of floral organ identity [CLS]  and was shown to encode\nan AP2/EREBP transcription factor (24, 25). Here, we show that loss-of-function ap2 mutants produce large seeds. Our studies using an allelic series of mutants", " not maternal-effect mutations. Thus, the IKU genes are also likely to operate differently than does AP2.\nHow does AP2 act maternally to control seed mass? Our experiments suggest that  [CLS] AP2 acts, in part, through its effects on both embryo cell number and size [CLS]  (Fig. 2 and Table 4). Others have shown that changes in cell number and size underlie ecotype variations in Arabidopsis seed size (13). Similar to our findings, this study", " encode\nan AP2/EREBP transcription factor (24, 25). Here, we show that loss-of-function ap2 mutants produce large seeds. Our studies using an allelic series of mutants provide strong support that  [CLS] AP2 functions directly in controlling seed mass [CLS]  (Table 2). A recent study provided additional support for this conclusion by showing that transgene suppression of AP2 activity in Arabidopsis produced defective flowers and large seeds (40). Thus,", "\nalthough AP2 does appear to colocalize to a QTL affecting seed mass at the bottom of chromosome IV (13). Conversely, a recent study used genetic experiments to conclude that  [CLS] AP2 acts through both the endosperm and maternal tissues to affect seed size [CLS]  (40).\nThe endosperm has been implicated to serve as the site of parent-of-origin effects on seed mass through the imprinting of\ngenes thought to be involved in enhancing or", " not maternal-effect mutations. Thus, the IKU genes are also likely to operate differently than does AP2.\nHow does AP2 act maternally to control seed mass? Our experiments suggest that  [CLS] AP2 acts, in part, through its effects on both embryo cell number [CLS]  and size (Fig. 2 and Table 4). Others have shown that changes in cell number and size underlie ecotype variations in Arabidopsis seed size (13). Similar to our findings,", " number differences are controlled by maternal\nfactors. However, by contrast to our results with AP2, ecotype differences in cell size were attributed to nonmaternal allelic variation. Our finding that  [CLS] AP2 acts maternally to affect embryo cell size [CLS]  may indicate that it operates through a mechanism that was not uncovered by studies\nof natural ecotype variations.\nThe seed coat has been implicated to influence seed mass. For", " stem cells undifferentiated similar to the wus mutant. We show that the premature termination of the shoot meristem in l28 mutants is caused by a mutation in the APETALA2 ( [CLS] AP2) gene that was previously identified as one of the components of the ABC model in floral patterning, where it represses AG (Bowman et al., 1991; Drews et al., 1991), in floral transition (Jofuku et al., 1994; Okamuro et al., 1997b), and in the control of seed size [CLS]  (Jofuku et al., 2005; Ohto et al., 2005).\nIn this article, we show that maintenance of the stem cell niche in the primary shoot meristem requires the activity of", " (Jofuku et al., 1994; Okamuro et al., 1997b), and in the control of seed size (Jofuku et al., 2005; Ohto et al., 2005).\nIn this article, we show that  [CLS] maintenance of the stem cell niche in the primary shoot meristem requires the activity of AP2 [CLS]  and redundant factor(s) via an AG independent mechanism that involves interaction with the WUS-CLV3 feedback loop.\n", " specific microenvironments, named stem cell niches (Weigel and J\u00fcrgens, 2002; Laux, 2003). Here, we identify a novel regulatory pathway in shoot meristem stem cell maintenance defined by AP2 function.\n [CLS] Stem Cell Maintenance Is Regulated by AP2 [CLS] AP2 was originally identified as a floral homeotic gene encoding A-function of the ABC model of organ identity specification\n(Bowman et al., 1989, 1991). Recently, it has also been implicated", " the maintenance\nof undifferentiated stem cells in specific microenvironments, named stem cell niches (Weigel and J\u00fcrgens, 2002; Laux, 2003). Here, we identify a novel regulatory pathway in shoot meristem  [CLS] stem cell maintenance defined by AP2 [CLS]  function.\nStem Cell Maintenance Is Regulated by AP2AP2 was originally identified as a floral homeotic gene encoding A-function of the ABC model of organ identity specification\n(Bowman et al.,", " (Weigel and J\u00fcrgens, 2002; Laux, 2003). Here, we identify a novel regulatory pathway in shoot meristem stem cell maintenance defined by AP2 function.\nStem Cell Maintenance Is Regulated by AP2 [CLS] AP2 was originally identified as a floral homeotic gene encoding A-function of the ABC model of organ identity specification\n(Bowman et al., 1989, 1991). Recently, it has also been implicated in floral transition and control of seed size [CLS]  (Okamuro et al., 1997b; Jofuku et al., 2005; Ohto et al., 2005). Here, we show that l28 and l28/+ plants have a number of phenotypes in common with ap2"]]
["seedev_train_279", [" affect seed mass by regulating the expression of other genes. Given the\ndramatic changes in hexose levels in ap2 mutants, potential targets of AP2 activity are enzymes involved in  [CLS] sugar metabolism, such as cell-wall-bound invertases [CLS] . Sucrose is transported from photosynthetic\norgans to the seed coat, a maternally derived structure, where it is metabolized differently early and late in embryogenesis\n(14, 50\u201352). During the early", "\norgans to the seed coat, a maternally derived structure, where it is metabolized differently early and late in embryogenesis\n(14, 50\u201352). During the early phase of favabean seed development,  [CLS] cell-wall-bound invertases localized in thin-walled parenchyma, the\ninnermost seed coat tissue, hydrolyze sucrose [CLS] . Hexoses formed by the reaction move apoplastically and are transported into\nembryo cells. Cell-wall-bound invertase activity decreases during the late phase of seed development, and sucrose is transported\ndirectly"]]
["seedev_train_280", [" example, sporophytic mutations in cereals that affect development\nof a specialized seed coat tissue responsible for nutrient transfer to the endosperm cause defects in seed development and\nsize (46\u201348).  [CLS] ap2 mutants have defective seed coats in that they lack epidermal plateaus and mucilage, their outer integument cells are larger [CLS] \nthan those of wild type and are irregular in shape, and mutant seeds are hypersensitive to bleach (24, 49). Although it is not clear whether these defects are directly", " example, sporophytic mutations in cereals that affect development\nof a specialized seed coat tissue responsible for nutrient transfer to the endosperm cause defects in seed development and\nsize (46\u201348).  [CLS] ap2 mutants have defective seed coats in that they lack epidermal plateaus and mucilage [CLS] , their outer integument cells are larger\nthan those of wild type and are irregular in shape, and mutant seeds are hypersensitive to bleach (24, 49). Although it is not", "\nof self-pollination in mutant plants. Given that limited availability of resources in the maternal plant appears to account\nfor the negative correlation between seed number and seed mass (4),  [CLS] ap2 mutants are expected to produce seeds larger [CLS]  than wild-type plants with normal fertility. We confirmed that reduced fertility\ndid affect seed mass and could account for \u224833% of the increase in average seed weight observed in", " example, sporophytic mutations in cereals that affect development\nof a specialized seed coat tissue responsible for nutrient transfer to the endosperm cause defects in seed development and\nsize (46\u201348).  [CLS] ap2 mutants have defective seed coats [CLS]  in that they lack epidermal plateaus and mucilage, their outer integument cells are larger\nthan those of wild type and are irregular in shape, and mutant seeds are hypersensitive", " cell\nnumber observed in ap2 mutants.\nAP2 is a transcription factor. Thus, it is likely to affect seed mass by regulating the expression of other genes. Given the\ndramatic  [CLS] changes in hexose levels in ap2 [CLS]  mutants, potential targets of AP2 activity are enzymes involved in sugar metabolism, such as cell-wall-bound invertases. Sucrose is transported from photosynthetic\norgans to the seed coat, a maternally derived", " mutation on seed mass is not solely due to its effects on fertility. Leaf number is closely related to the availability of\nreproductive resources in the maternal plant (13).  [CLS] ap2 mutants produced fewer leaves [CLS]  than wild type and, presumably, have fewer resources available. Yet, ap2 mutants gave rise to significantly larger seeds.\nMaternal Effect of AP2 on Seed Mass. Experiments in which wildtype", " defective flowers and large seeds (40). Thus, the extent of AP2 gene activity, based on its well defined role in flower development, plays a role in determining seed mass.\n [CLS] ap2 mutations negatively affect plant fertility, primarily through disruption of flower structure [CLS]  that limits the efficiency\nof self-pollination in mutant plants. Given that limited availability of resources in the maternal plant appears to account\nfor the negative correlation between seed number", " example, sporophytic mutations in cereals that affect development\nof a specialized seed coat tissue responsible for nutrient transfer to the endosperm cause defects in seed development and\nsize (46\u201348).  [CLS] ap2 mutants have defective seed coats in that they lack epidermal plateaus and mucilage, their outer integument cells are larger\nthan those of wild type and are irregular in shape [CLS] , and mutant seeds are hypersensitive to bleach (24, 49). Although it is not clear whether these defects are directly associated with AP2 effects on seed mass, they emphasize that", " defective flowers and large seeds (40). Thus, the extent of AP2 gene activity, based on its well defined role in flower development, plays a role in determining seed mass.\n [CLS] ap2 mutations negatively affect plant fertility [CLS] , primarily through disruption of flower structure that limits the efficiency\nof self-pollination in mutant plants. Given that limited availability of resources in the maternal plant appears to account\nfor", " is closely related to the availability of\nreproductive resources in the maternal plant (13). ap2 mutants produced fewer leaves than wild type and, presumably, have fewer resources available. Yet,  [CLS] ap2 mutants gave rise to significantly larger seeds [CLS] .\nMaternal Effect of AP2 on Seed Mass. Experiments in which wildtype and ap2 mutant genotypes were crossed reciprocally (Table 3) provided an important clue about the mechanisms controlling seed", " example, sporophytic mutations in cereals that affect development\nof a specialized seed coat tissue responsible for nutrient transfer to the endosperm cause defects in seed development and\nsize (46\u201348).  [CLS] ap2 mutants have defective seed coats in that they lack epidermal plateaus [CLS]  and mucilage, their outer integument cells are larger\nthan those of wild type and are irregular in shape, and mutant seeds are hypersensitive to bleach (24, 49). Although it", " high at 9 and 11 DAP in ap2 mutants but was very low during the same period of wild-type seed development. We speculate that the altered hexose/sucrose\nratios during  [CLS] ap2 mutant seed development may promote an extended period of cell division [CLS]  that could account for the increase in embryo cell\nnumber observed in ap2 mutants.\nAP2 is a transcription factor. Thus, it is likely to affect seed mass by regulating", " seed development. We speculate that the altered hexose/sucrose\nratios during ap2 mutant seed development may promote an extended period of cell division that could account for the increase in  [CLS] embryo cell\nnumber observed in ap2 [CLS]  mutants.\nAP2 is a transcription factor. Thus, it is likely to affect seed mass by regulating the expression of other genes. Given the\ndramatic changes in hexose levels in", " potentially through the seed coat, to control seed mass (Table 3) and affects soluble sugar metabolism during seed development (Fig. 4) provide a potential explanation for the increase in  [CLS] embryo cell number in ap2 [CLS]  mutant seeds (Table 4). During seed development, modulation of hexose and sucrose levels has been implicated to control cellular activities (reviewed\nin ref. 15). Specifically, a high ratio of", " effects on seed mass, they emphasize that the maternal component of the seed is defective in ap2 mutants.\nAP2, Seed Mass, and Soluble Sugar Metabolism. Our findings that the  [CLS] ap2 mutation acts maternally, potentially through the seed coat, to control seed mass [CLS]  (Table 3) and affects soluble sugar metabolism during seed development (Fig. 4) provide a potential explanation for the increase in embryo cell number in ap2 mutant seeds (Table 4).", " enter the maturation phase (15). Thus, cell division during the morphogenesis phase and seed filling during the maturation phase appear to correlate with\nchanges in hexose and sucrose levels.\n [CLS] ap2 mutations induced changes in the levels of hexose and sucrose [CLS]  in developing seeds. These changes resulted in hexose/sucrose\nratios that reached a higher maximal level in ap2 mutant seeds compared with wild-type seeds and that remained high for a", " defective flowers and large seeds (40). Thus, the extent of AP2 gene activity, based on its well defined role in flower development, plays a role in determining seed mass.\n [CLS] ap2 mutations negatively affect plant fertility, primarily through disruption of flower structure that limits the efficiency\nof self-pollination [CLS]  in mutant plants. Given that limited availability of resources in the maternal plant appears to account\nfor the negative correlation between seed number and seed mass (4), ap2 mutants", " example, sporophytic mutations in cereals that affect development\nof a specialized seed coat tissue responsible for nutrient transfer to the endosperm cause defects in seed development and\nsize (46\u201348).  [CLS] ap2 mutants have defective seed coats in that they lack epidermal plateaus and mucilage, their outer integument cells are larger\nthan those of wild type and are irregular in shape, and mutant seeds are hypersensitive to bleach [CLS]  (24, 49). Although it is not clear whether these defects are directly associated with AP2 effects on seed mass, they emphasize that the maternal component of the seed is"]]
["seedev_train_281", [" factor. Thus, it is likely to affect seed mass by regulating the expression of other genes. Given the\ndramatic changes in hexose levels in ap2 mutants, potential targets of  [CLS] AP2 activity are enzymes involved in sugar metabolism, such as cell-wall-bound invertases [CLS] . Sucrose is transported from photosynthetic\norgans to the seed coat, a maternally derived structure, where it is metabolized differently early and late in embryogenesis\n(14, 50\u201352). During the early", " seed cell number both in fava bean cultivars that exhibit variations in seed size and in the maize miniature1 mutant that is defective in the enzyme (15, 53). Thus,  [CLS] AP2 may affect seed mass by controlling cell-wall-bound invertase [CLS]  activity.\nWe note that two other members of the AP2/EREBP transcription factor family have roles that appear to intersect with those\nof AP2. Mutations in the Arabidopsis WRINKLED1 gene"]]
["seedev_train_282", [" seed mass by controlling cell-wall-bound invertase activity.\nWe note that two other members of the AP2/EREBP transcription factor family have roles that appear to intersect with those\nof AP2.  [CLS] Mutations in the Arabidopsis WRINKLED1 gene lead to defects in carbohydrate metabolism and reductions in seed mass [CLS]  and oil content (38, 54). Arabidopsis AINTEGUMENTA gene is thought to play a role in controlling cell proliferation (55, 56). Ectopic expression of AINTEGUMENTA caused plant organs, including seeds,", " seed mass by controlling cell-wall-bound invertase activity.\nWe note that two other members of the AP2/EREBP transcription factor family have roles that appear to intersect with those\nof AP2.  [CLS] Mutations in the Arabidopsis WRINKLED1 gene lead to defects in carbohydrate metabolism and reductions in seed mass and oil content [CLS]  (38, 54). Arabidopsis AINTEGUMENTA gene is thought to play a role in controlling cell proliferation (55, 56). Ectopic expression of AINTEGUMENTA caused plant organs, including seeds, to increase in", " seed mass by controlling cell-wall-bound invertase activity.\nWe note that two other members of the AP2/EREBP transcription factor family have roles that appear to intersect with those\nof AP2.  [CLS] Mutations in the Arabidopsis WRINKLED1 gene lead to defects in carbohydrate metabolism [CLS]  and reductions in seed mass and oil content (38, 54). Arabidopsis AINTEGUMENTA gene is thought to play a role in controlling cell proliferation (55, 56). Ectopic expression of AINTEGUMENTA"]]
["seedev_train_283", [" favabean seed development, cell-wall-bound invertases localized in thin-walled parenchyma, the\ninnermost seed coat tissue, hydrolyze sucrose. Hexoses formed by the reaction move apoplastically and are transported into\nembryo cells.  [CLS] Cell-wall-bound invertase activity decreases during the late phase of seed development [CLS] , and sucrose is transported\ndirectly into embryo cells where it is hydrolyzed by sucrose synthase. Cell-wall-bound invertase activity has been correlated\nwith seed cell number both in fava bean"]]
["seedev_train_284", [" allelic series of mutants provide strong support that AP2 functions directly in controlling seed mass (Table 2). A recent study provided additional support for this conclusion by showing that  [CLS] transgene suppression of AP2 activity in Arabidopsis produced defective flowers [CLS]  and large seeds (40). Thus, the extent of AP2 gene activity, based on its well defined role in flower development, plays a role in determining seed mass.\nap2 mutations", " allelic series of mutants provide strong support that AP2 functions directly in controlling seed mass (Table 2). A recent study provided additional support for this conclusion by showing that  [CLS] transgene suppression of AP2 activity in Arabidopsis produced defective flowers and large seeds [CLS]  (40). Thus, the extent of AP2 gene activity, based on its well defined role in flower development, plays a role in determining seed mass.\nap2 mutations negatively affect plant"]]
["seedev_train_285", [" to intersect with those\nof AP2. Mutations in the Arabidopsis WRINKLED1 gene lead to defects in carbohydrate metabolism and reductions in seed mass and oil content (38, 54). Arabidopsis  [CLS] AINTEGUMENTA gene is thought to play a role in controlling cell proliferation [CLS]  (55, 56). Ectopic expression of AINTEGUMENTA caused plant organs, including seeds, to increase in size in both transgenic Arabidopsis and tobacco (57). The increase in seed size in transgenic"]]
["seedev_train_286", [" that limited availability of resources in the maternal plant appears to account\nfor the negative correlation between seed number and seed mass (4), ap2 mutants are expected to produce  [CLS] seeds larger than wild-type plants [CLS]  with normal fertility. We confirmed that reduced fertility\ndid affect seed mass and could account for \u224833% of the increase in average seed weight observed in a strong ap2"]]
["seedev_train_287", [" of chromosome IV (13). Conversely, a recent study used genetic experiments to conclude that AP2 acts through both the endosperm and maternal tissues to affect seed size (40).\nThe  [CLS] endosperm has been implicated to serve as the site of parent-of-origin effects on seed mass [CLS]  through the imprinting of\ngenes thought to be involved in enhancing or suppressing endosperm size and, therefore, seed and embryo mass (21\u201323). Although little is known of the mechanisms", " coat, is more important than its activity in the embryo and\nendosperm in controlling seed mass. Alternatively, because the maternal plant contributes two genome equivalents to the triploid\nendosperm,  [CLS] seed mass may be affected by AP2 gene dosage in the endosperm [CLS] . A QTL analysis of small- and large-seeded Arabidopsis ecotypes suggests that maternal tissues are important in determining seed mass (13). A number of QTL affecting seed mass colocalized with", " colocalize to a QTL affecting seed mass at the bottom of chromosome IV (13). Conversely, a recent study used genetic experiments to conclude that AP2 acts through both the  [CLS] endosperm and maternal tissues to affect seed size [CLS]  (40).\nThe endosperm has been implicated to serve as the site of parent-of-origin effects on seed mass through the imprinting of\ngenes thought to be involved in enhancing or"]]
["seedev_train_288", [" hexose/sucrose ratios remained high at 9 and 11 DAP in ap2 mutants but was very low during the same period of wild-type seed development. We speculate that the altered  [CLS] hexose/sucrose\nratios during ap2 mutant seed development may promote an extended period of cell division [CLS]  that could account for the increase in embryo cell\nnumber observed in ap2 mutants.\nAP2 is a transcription factor. Thus, it is likely to affect seed mass by regulating"]]
["seedev_train_289", [" ap2 mutants but was very low during the same period of wild-type seed development. We speculate that the altered hexose/sucrose\nratios during ap2 mutant seed development may promote an  [CLS] extended period of cell division that could account for the increase in embryo cell\nnumber [CLS]  observed in ap2 mutants.\nAP2 is a transcription factor. Thus, it is likely to affect seed mass by regulating the expression of other genes. Given the\ndramatic changes in"]]
["seedev_train_290", [" into\nembryo cells. Cell-wall-bound invertase activity decreases during the late phase of seed development, and sucrose is transported\ndirectly into embryo cells where it is hydrolyzed by sucrose synthase.  [CLS] Cell-wall-bound invertase activity has been correlated\nwith seed cell number both in fava bean cultivars that exhibit variations in seed size and in the maize miniature1 [CLS]  mutant that is defective in the enzyme (15, 53). Thus, AP2 may affect seed mass by controlling cell-wall-bound invertase activity.\nWe note that two other members of the AP2/EREBP"]]
["seedev_train_291", [" during the late phase of seed development, and sucrose is transported\ndirectly into embryo cells where it is hydrolyzed by sucrose synthase. Cell-wall-bound invertase activity has been correlated\nwith  [CLS] seed cell number both in fava bean cultivars that exhibit variations in seed size [CLS]  and in the maize miniature1 mutant that is defective in the enzyme (15, 53). Thus, AP2 may affect seed mass by controlling cell-wall-bound invertase activity.\nWe note that two"]]
["seedev_train_292", [" ecotype variations.\nThe seed coat has been implicated to influence seed mass. For example, sporophytic mutations in cereals that affect development\nof a specialized seed coat tissue responsible for  [CLS] nutrient transfer to the endosperm cause defects in seed development and\nsize [CLS]  (46\u201348). ap2 mutants have defective seed coats in that they lack epidermal plateaus and mucilage, their outer integument cells are larger\nthan those of wild type and are irregular"]]
["seedev_train_293", [" mass is not solely due to its effects on fertility. Leaf number is closely related to the availability of\nreproductive resources in the maternal plant (13). ap2 mutants produced  [CLS] fewer leaves than wild type [CLS]  and, presumably, have fewer resources available. Yet, ap2 mutants gave rise to significantly larger seeds.\nMaternal Effect of AP2 on Seed Mass. Experiments in which wildtype and ap2 mutant"]]
["seedev_train_294", [" potentially through the seed coat, to control seed mass (Table 3) and affects soluble sugar metabolism during seed development (Fig. 4) provide a potential explanation for the increase in  [CLS] embryo cell number in ap2 mutant seeds [CLS]  (Table 4). During seed development, modulation of hexose and sucrose levels has been implicated to control cellular activities (reviewed\nin ref. 15). Specifically, a high ratio of hexose to", " defective seed coats in that they lack epidermal plateaus and mucilage, their outer integument cells are larger\nthan those of wild type and are irregular in shape, and mutant  [CLS] seeds are hypersensitive to bleach [CLS]  (24, 49). Although it is not clear whether these defects are directly associated with AP2 effects on seed mass, they emphasize that the maternal component of the seed is"]]
["seedev_train_295", [" account\nfor the negative correlation between seed number and seed mass (4), ap2 mutants are expected to produce seeds larger than wild-type plants with normal fertility. We confirmed that  [CLS] reduced fertility\ndid affect seed mass and could account for \u224833% of the increase in average seed weight [CLS]  observed in a strong ap2 mutant (Table 3). However, the remaining, much larger effect of AP2 on seed mass must be attributed to factors unrelated to fertility. The early", " account\nfor the negative correlation between seed number and seed mass (4), ap2 mutants are expected to produce seeds larger than wild-type plants with normal fertility. We confirmed that  [CLS] reduced fertility\ndid affect seed mass [CLS]  and could account for \u224833% of the increase in average seed weight observed in a strong ap2 mutant (Table 3). However, the remaining, much larger effect of AP2 on"]]
["seedev_train_296", [" genome equivalents to the triploid\nendosperm, seed mass may be affected by AP2 gene dosage in the endosperm. A QTL analysis of small- and large-seeded Arabidopsis ecotypes suggests that  [CLS] maternal tissues are important in determining seed mass [CLS]  (13). A number of QTL affecting seed mass colocalized with QTL for maternal traits such as seed number, fruit size, and plant\nresources, suggesting that they operate through maternal", " a QTL affecting seed mass at the bottom of chromosome IV (13). Conversely, a recent study used genetic experiments to conclude that AP2 acts through both the endosperm and  [CLS] maternal tissues to affect seed size [CLS]  (40).\nThe endosperm has been implicated to serve as the site of parent-of-origin effects on seed mass through the imprinting of\ngenes thought to be involved in enhancing or"]]
["seedev_train_297", [" indicate that it operates through a mechanism that was not uncovered by studies\nof natural ecotype variations.\nThe seed coat has been implicated to influence seed mass. For example,  [CLS] sporophytic mutations in cereals that affect development\nof a specialized seed coat tissue [CLS]  responsible for nutrient transfer to the endosperm cause defects in seed development and\nsize (46\u201348). ap2 mutants have defective seed coats in that they lack epidermal plateaus and mucilage,", " indicate that it operates through a mechanism that was not uncovered by studies\nof natural ecotype variations.\nThe seed coat has been implicated to influence seed mass. For example,  [CLS] sporophytic mutations in cereals that affect development\nof a specialized seed coat tissue responsible for nutrient transfer to the endosperm cause defects in seed development [CLS]  and\nsize (46\u201348). ap2 mutants have defective seed coats in that they lack epidermal plateaus and mucilage, their outer integument cells are larger\nthan those of wild type and"]]
["seedev_train_298", [" hexose/sucrose\nratios during ap2 mutant seed development may promote an extended period of cell division that could account for the increase in embryo cell\nnumber observed in ap2 mutants.\n [CLS] AP2 is a transcription factor. Thus, it is likely to affect seed mass [CLS]  by regulating the expression of other genes. Given the\ndramatic changes in hexose levels in ap2 mutants, potential targets of AP2 activity are enzymes involved in sugar metabolism, such", " in a region-specific pattern in the four wholes of flower, and is detected in other vegetative\ntissues (Jofuku et al., 1994; Okamuro et al., 1997). Recent reports showed that  [CLS] AP2 controlled seed mass [CLS]  (Jofuku et al., 1994, 2005; Ohto et al., 2005) and that expression of the AP2 protein was translationally regulated by the microRNA mi172 (Aukerman and Sakai, 2003; Chen, 2004).", " [CLS] AP2 plays a global role not only in floral development but also in the control of seed mass [CLS] \n(Jofuku et al., 1994, 2005; Okamuro et al., 1997; Ohto et al., 2005). In addition, AP2 expression is controlled transcriptionally and translationally in a co-ordinated manner. In particular, micro", " the 3\u2032-half is TG rather than CG in the AW-box.\nThe AP2-type transcription factors characterized previously act as important key regulators in meristem function and organ development. For example,  [CLS] AP2 is a class A floral homeotic gene (Bowman et\u00a0al., 1989; Jofuku et\u00a0al., 1994; Okamuro et\u00a0al., 1997) and it is also involved in control of seed size [CLS]  (Ohto et\u00a0al., 2005). ANT regulates ovule development and floral organ growth (Elliott et\u00a0al., 1996; Mizukami and Fischer, 2000), and PLETHORA1 (PLT1) and PLT2 are required for stem cell specification"]]
["seedev_train_299", [" seed and embryo mass (21\u201323). Although little is known of the mechanisms mediating parent-of-origin effects on seed mass, no current evidence points\nto an involvement of AP2. For example,  [CLS] mutations in three genes, MEA, FIE, and FIS2, each induce endosperm phenotypes that mimic paternal genomic excess [CLS]  (39, 42\u201344). However, these mutations are inherited differently than AP2 is in that ap2 is a maternal sporophytic mutation, whereas mea, fie, and fis2, are female gametophytic mutations. Thus,"]]
["seedev_train_300", [" effects on seed mass, they emphasize that the maternal component of the seed is defective in ap2 mutants.\nAP2, Seed Mass, and Soluble Sugar Metabolism. Our findings that the  [CLS] ap2 mutation acts maternally, potentially through the seed coat, to control seed mass (Table 3) and affects soluble sugar metabolism [CLS]  during seed development (Fig. 4) provide a potential explanation for the increase in embryo cell number in ap2 mutant seeds (Table 4). During seed development, modulation of hexose and", " phase appear to correlate with\nchanges in hexose and sucrose levels.\nap2 mutations induced changes in the levels of hexose and sucrose in developing seeds. These changes resulted in  [CLS] hexose/sucrose\nratios that reached a higher maximal level in ap2 [CLS]  mutant seeds compared with wild-type seeds and that remained high for a longer period of seed development in ap2 mutants than they did in wild type (Fig. 4). For", " seeds compared with wild-type seeds and that remained high for a longer period of seed development in ap2 mutants than they did in wild type (Fig. 4). For example,  [CLS] hexose/sucrose ratios remained high at 9 and 11 DAP in ap2 [CLS]  mutants but was very low during the same period of wild-type seed development. We speculate that the altered hexose/sucrose\nratios during ap2 mutant seed development may promote an extended"]]
["seedev_train_301", [" 2). A recent study provided additional support for this conclusion by showing that transgene suppression of AP2 activity in Arabidopsis produced defective flowers and large seeds (40). Thus, the  [CLS] extent of AP2 gene activity, based on its well defined role in flower development, plays a role in determining seed mass [CLS] .\nap2 mutations negatively affect plant fertility, primarily through disruption of flower structure that limits the efficiency\nof self-pollination in mutant plants. Given that limited availability of resources in the"]]
["seedev_train_302", [" mea, fie, and fis2, are female gametophytic mutations. Thus, AP2 does not act equivalently with these other genes, although they could participate in a common pathway. Two other genes,  [CLS] IKU1 and IKU2, have been proposed to mediate the effects of maternal and paternal dosage on seed size, because mutations in either gene\naffect many aspects of endosperm development [CLS]  (45). However, unlike AP2, both iku mutations are sporophytic recessive and not maternal-effect mutations. Thus, the IKU genes are also likely to operate differently than does AP2.\nHow does"]]
["seedev_train_303", [" during the late phase of seed development, and sucrose is transported\ndirectly into embryo cells where it is hydrolyzed by sucrose synthase. Cell-wall-bound invertase activity has been correlated\nwith  [CLS] seed cell number both in fava bean cultivars that exhibit variations in seed size and in the maize miniature1 [CLS]  mutant that is defective in the enzyme (15, 53). Thus, AP2 may affect seed mass by controlling cell-wall-bound invertase activity.\nWe note that two other members of the AP2/EREBP"]]
["seedev_train_304", [" identified originally as a homeotic gene required for the specification of floral organ identity and was shown to encode\nan AP2/EREBP transcription factor (24, 25). Here, we show that  [CLS] loss-of-function ap2 mutants produce large seeds [CLS] . Our studies using an allelic series of mutants provide strong support that AP2 functions directly in controlling seed mass (Table 2). A recent study provided additional support for this"]]
["seedev_train_305", [" tissue responsible for nutrient transfer to the endosperm cause defects in seed development and\nsize (46\u201348). ap2 mutants have defective seed coats in that they lack epidermal plateaus and  [CLS] mucilage, their outer integument cells are larger\nthan those of wild type [CLS]  and are irregular in shape, and mutant seeds are hypersensitive to bleach (24, 49). Although it is not clear whether these defects are directly associated with AP2 effects on"]]
["seedev_train_306", [" into\nembryo cells. Cell-wall-bound invertase activity decreases during the late phase of seed development, and sucrose is transported\ndirectly into embryo cells where it is hydrolyzed by sucrose synthase.  [CLS] Cell-wall-bound invertase activity has been correlated\nwith seed cell number both in fava bean cultivars that exhibit variations in seed size [CLS]  and in the maize miniature1 mutant that is defective in the enzyme (15, 53). Thus, AP2 may affect seed mass by controlling cell-wall-bound invertase activity.\nWe note that two"]]
["seedev_train_307", [" and fis2, are female gametophytic mutations. Thus, AP2 does not act equivalently with these other genes, although they could participate in a common pathway. Two other genes, IKU1 and  [CLS] IKU2, have been proposed to mediate the effects of maternal and paternal dosage on seed size [CLS] , because mutations in either gene\naffect many aspects of endosperm development (45). However, unlike AP2, both iku mutations are sporophytic recessive and not maternal-effect mutations. Thus, the IKU genes"]]
["seedev_train_308", [" both in fava bean cultivars that exhibit variations in seed size and in the maize miniature1 mutant that is defective in the enzyme (15, 53). Thus, AP2 may affect  [CLS] seed mass by controlling cell-wall-bound invertase [CLS]  activity.\nWe note that two other members of the AP2/EREBP transcription factor family have roles that appear to intersect with those\nof AP2. Mutations in the Arabidopsis WRINKLED1 gene"]]
["seedev_train_309", [" recent study provided additional support for this conclusion by showing that transgene suppression of AP2 activity in Arabidopsis produced defective flowers and large seeds (40). Thus, the extent of  [CLS] AP2 gene activity, based on its well defined role in flower development [CLS] , plays a role in determining seed mass.\nap2 mutations negatively affect plant fertility, primarily through disruption of flower structure that limits the efficiency\nof self-pollination in mutant plants. Given", " stem cells undifferentiated similar to the wus mutant. We show that the premature termination of the shoot meristem in l28 mutants is caused by a mutation in the APETALA2 ( [CLS] AP2) gene that was previously identified as one of the components of the ABC model in floral patterning [CLS] , where it represses AG (Bowman et al., 1991; Drews et al., 1991), in floral transition (Jofuku et al., 1994; Okamuro et al., 1997b), and in the control of seed", " stem cells undifferentiated similar to the wus mutant. We show that the premature termination of the shoot meristem in l28 mutants is caused by a mutation in the APETALA2 ( [CLS] AP2) gene that was previously identified as one of the components of the ABC model in floral patterning, where it represses AG (Bowman et al., 1991; Drews et al., 1991), in floral transition [CLS]  (Jofuku et al., 1994; Okamuro et al., 1997b), and in the control of seed size (Jofuku et al., 2005; Ohto et al., 2005).\nIn this article, we show that", " (Weigel and J\u00fcrgens, 2002; Laux, 2003). Here, we identify a novel regulatory pathway in shoot meristem stem cell maintenance defined by AP2 function.\nStem Cell Maintenance Is Regulated by AP2 [CLS] AP2 was originally identified as a floral homeotic gene encoding A-function of the ABC model of organ identity specification\n(Bowman et al., 1989, 1991). Recently, it has also been implicated in floral transition [CLS]  and control of seed size (Okamuro et al., 1997b; Jofuku et al., 2005; Ohto et al., 2005). Here, we show that l28 and l28/+ plants have a number of"]]
["seedev_train_310", [" seed and embryo mass (21\u201323). Although little is known of the mechanisms mediating parent-of-origin effects on seed mass, no current evidence points\nto an involvement of AP2. For example,  [CLS] mutations in three genes, MEA, FIE, and FIS2, each induce endosperm phenotypes that mimic paternal genomic excess [CLS]  (39, 42\u201344). However, these mutations are inherited differently than AP2 is in that ap2 is a maternal sporophytic mutation, whereas mea, fie, and fis2, are female gametophytic mutations. Thus,"]]
["seedev_train_311", [" phase (15). Thus, cell division during the morphogenesis phase and seed filling during the maturation phase appear to correlate with\nchanges in hexose and sucrose levels.\nap2 mutations induced  [CLS] changes in the levels of hexose and sucrose in developing seeds [CLS] . These changes resulted in hexose/sucrose\nratios that reached a higher maximal level in ap2 mutant seeds compared with wild-type seeds and that remained high for a longer period of"]]
["seedev_train_312", [" defects in carbohydrate metabolism and reductions in seed mass and oil content (38, 54). Arabidopsis AINTEGUMENTA gene is thought to play a role in controlling cell proliferation (55, 56).  [CLS] Ectopic expression of AINTEGUMENTA caused plant organs, including seeds, to increase in size [CLS]  in both transgenic Arabidopsis and tobacco (57). The increase in seed size in transgenic plants appears to result from an increase in cell number during seed development.\nThus, other"]]
["seedev_train_313", [" in controlling cell proliferation (55, 56). Ectopic expression of AINTEGUMENTA caused plant organs, including seeds, to increase in size in both transgenic Arabidopsis and tobacco (57). The increase in  [CLS] seed size in transgenic plants appears to result from an increase in cell number [CLS]  during seed development.\nThus, other AP2/EREBP proteins may function in a pathway similar to that of AP2.\n"]]
["seedev_train_314", [" and fis2, are female gametophytic mutations. Thus, AP2 does not act equivalently with these other genes, although they could participate in a common pathway. Two other genes, IKU1 and  [CLS] IKU2, have been proposed to mediate the effects of maternal and paternal dosage on seed size, because mutations in either gene\naffect many aspects of endosperm development [CLS]  (45). However, unlike AP2, both iku mutations are sporophytic recessive and not maternal-effect mutations. Thus, the IKU genes are also likely to operate differently than does AP2.\nHow does"]]
["seedev_train_315", [" factor. Thus, it is likely to affect seed mass by regulating the expression of other genes. Given the\ndramatic changes in hexose levels in ap2 mutants, potential targets of  [CLS] AP2 activity are enzymes involved in sugar metabolism [CLS] , such as cell-wall-bound invertases. Sucrose is transported from photosynthetic\norgans to the seed coat, a maternally derived structure, where it is metabolized differently early and late in embryogenesis\n(14,"]]
["seedev_train_316", [" extent of AP2 gene activity, based on its well defined role in flower development, plays a role in determining seed mass.\nap2 mutations negatively affect plant fertility, primarily through  [CLS] disruption of flower structure that limits the efficiency\nof self-pollination [CLS]  in mutant plants. Given that limited availability of resources in the maternal plant appears to account\nfor the negative correlation between seed number and seed mass (4), ap2 mutants"]]
["seedev_train_317", [" a higher proportion of sucrose to hexose is associated with cell expansion and seed filling\nduring the late maturation phase (14\u201316). For example, immature fava bean embryos cultured with  [CLS] high concentrations of hexose continue to undergo cell divisions [CLS] \nwhereas those cultured with high sucrose concentration enter the maturation phase (15). Thus, cell division during the morphogenesis phase and seed filling during the maturation phase appear to correlate"]]
["seedev_train_318", [" mea, fie, and fis2, are female gametophytic mutations. Thus, AP2 does not act equivalently with these other genes, although they could participate in a common pathway. Two other genes,  [CLS] IKU1 and IKU2, have been proposed to mediate the effects of maternal and paternal dosage on seed size [CLS] , because mutations in either gene\naffect many aspects of endosperm development (45). However, unlike AP2, both iku mutations are sporophytic recessive and not maternal-effect mutations. Thus, the IKU genes"]]
["seedev_train_319", [" seed filling\nduring the late maturation phase (14\u201316). For example, immature fava bean embryos cultured with high concentrations of hexose continue to undergo cell divisions\nwhereas those cultured with  [CLS] high sucrose concentration enter the maturation phase [CLS]  (15). Thus, cell division during the morphogenesis phase and seed filling during the maturation phase appear to correlate with\nchanges in hexose and sucrose levels.\nap2 mutations induced changes"]]
["seedev_train_320", [" Our experiments suggest that AP2 acts, in part, through its effects on both embryo cell number and size (Fig. 2 and Table 4). Others have shown that changes in  [CLS] cell number and size underlie ecotype variations in Arabidopsis seed size [CLS]  (13). Similar to our findings, this study of natural variation concluded that cell number differences are controlled by maternal\nfactors. However, by contrast to our results with AP2, ecotype"]]
["seedev_train_321", [" ecotype variations.\nThe seed coat has been implicated to influence seed mass. For example, sporophytic mutations in cereals that affect development\nof a specialized seed coat tissue responsible for  [CLS] nutrient transfer to the endosperm cause defects in seed development [CLS]  and\nsize (46\u201348). ap2 mutants have defective seed coats in that they lack epidermal plateaus and mucilage, their outer integument cells are larger\nthan those of wild type and"]]
["seedev_train_322", [" weight observed in a strong ap2 mutant (Table 3). However, the remaining, much larger effect of AP2 on seed mass must be attributed to factors unrelated to fertility. The  [CLS] early flowering of plants with strong ap2 [CLS]  mutant alleles (Table 1) provides additional support for the conclusion that the effects of the ap2 mutation on seed mass is not solely due to its effects on fertility.", " to produce seeds larger than wild-type plants with normal fertility. We confirmed that reduced fertility\ndid affect seed mass and could account for \u224833% of the increase in average  [CLS] seed weight observed in a strong ap2 [CLS]  mutant (Table 3). However, the remaining, much larger effect of AP2 on seed mass must be attributed to factors unrelated to fertility. The early flowering of plants with strong"]]
["seedev_train_323", [" seed and embryo mass (21\u201323). Although little is known of the mechanisms mediating parent-of-origin effects on seed mass, no current evidence points\nto an involvement of AP2. For example,  [CLS] mutations in three genes, MEA, FIE, and FIS2, each induce endosperm phenotypes that mimic paternal genomic excess [CLS]  (39, 42\u201344). However, these mutations are inherited differently than AP2 is in that ap2 is a maternal sporophytic mutation, whereas mea, fie, and fis2, are female gametophytic mutations. Thus,"]]
["seedev_train_324", [" (reviewed\nin ref. 15). Specifically, a high ratio of hexose to sucrose is correlated strongly with mitotic activity during the early morphogenesis\nphase of seed development, whereas a higher  [CLS] proportion of sucrose to hexose is associated with cell expansion and seed filling [CLS] \nduring the late maturation phase (14\u201316). For example, immature fava bean embryos cultured with high concentrations of hexose continue to undergo cell divisions\nwhereas those cultured with high sucrose", " (reviewed\nin ref. 15). Specifically, a high ratio of hexose to sucrose is correlated strongly with mitotic activity during the early morphogenesis\nphase of seed development, whereas a higher  [CLS] proportion of sucrose to hexose is associated with cell expansion [CLS]  and seed filling\nduring the late maturation phase (14\u201316). For example, immature fava bean embryos cultured with high concentrations of hexose continue to undergo cell divisions\nwhereas those cultured"]]
["seedev_train_325", [" high concentrations of hexose continue to undergo cell divisions\nwhereas those cultured with high sucrose concentration enter the maturation phase (15). Thus, cell division during the morphogenesis phase and  [CLS] seed filling during the maturation phase appear to correlate with\nchanges in hexose and sucrose levels [CLS] .\nap2 mutations induced changes in the levels of hexose and sucrose in developing seeds. These changes resulted in hexose/sucrose\nratios that reached a higher maximal level in ap2 mutant", " example, immature fava bean embryos cultured with high concentrations of hexose continue to undergo cell divisions\nwhereas those cultured with high sucrose concentration enter the maturation phase (15). Thus,  [CLS] cell division during the morphogenesis phase and seed filling during the maturation phase appear to correlate with\nchanges in hexose and sucrose levels [CLS] .\nap2 mutations induced changes in the levels of hexose and sucrose in developing seeds. These changes resulted in hexose/sucrose\nratios that reached a higher maximal level in ap2 mutant"]]
["seedev_train_326", ["\norgans to the seed coat, a maternally derived structure, where it is metabolized differently early and late in embryogenesis\n(14, 50\u201352). During the early phase of favabean seed development,  [CLS] cell-wall-bound invertases localized in thin-walled parenchyma [CLS] , the\ninnermost seed coat tissue, hydrolyze sucrose. Hexoses formed by the reaction move apoplastically and are transported into\nembryo cells. Cell-wall-bound invertase activity decreases during the late phase of", "\norgans to the seed coat, a maternally derived structure, where it is metabolized differently early and late in embryogenesis\n(14, 50\u201352). During the early phase of favabean seed development,  [CLS] cell-wall-bound invertases localized in thin-walled parenchyma, the\ninnermost seed coat tissue [CLS] , hydrolyze sucrose. Hexoses formed by the reaction move apoplastically and are transported into\nembryo cells. Cell-wall-bound invertase activity decreases during the late phase of seed development, and sucrose is"]]
["seedev_train_327", [" cereals that affect development\nof a specialized seed coat tissue responsible for nutrient transfer to the endosperm cause defects in seed development and\nsize (46\u201348). ap2 mutants have defective  [CLS] seed coats in that they lack epidermal plateaus and mucilage [CLS] , their outer integument cells are larger\nthan those of wild type and are irregular in shape, and mutant seeds are hypersensitive to bleach (24, 49). Although it is not"]]
["seedev_train_328", [" formed by the reaction move apoplastically and are transported into\nembryo cells. Cell-wall-bound invertase activity decreases during the late phase of seed development, and sucrose is transported\ndirectly into  [CLS] embryo cells where it is hydrolyzed by sucrose synthase [CLS] . Cell-wall-bound invertase activity has been correlated\nwith seed cell number both in fava bean cultivars that exhibit variations in seed size and in the maize miniature1 mutant that is"]]
["seedev_train_329", [" in ap2 mutant seeds (Table 4). During seed development, modulation of hexose and sucrose levels has been implicated to control cellular activities (reviewed\nin ref. 15). Specifically, a high  [CLS] ratio of hexose to sucrose is correlated strongly with mitotic activity during the early morphogenesis\nphase of seed development [CLS] , whereas a higher proportion of sucrose to hexose is associated with cell expansion and seed filling\nduring the late maturation phase (14\u201316). For example, immature fava bean embryos cultured"]]
["seedev_train_330", [" in both transgenic Arabidopsis and tobacco (57). The increase in seed size in transgenic plants appears to result from an increase in cell number during seed development.\nThus, other  [CLS] AP2/EREBP [CLS]  proteins may function in a pathway similar to that of AP2.\n", " [CLS] AP2/EREBP [CLS]  transcription factor (24, 25). Here, we show that loss-of-function ap2 mutants produce large seeds. Our studies using an allelic series of mutants provide strong support that AP2 functions directly", " miniature1 mutant that is defective in the enzyme (15, 53). Thus, AP2 may affect seed mass by controlling cell-wall-bound invertase activity.\nWe note that two other members of the  [CLS] AP2/EREBP [CLS]  transcription factor family have roles that appear to intersect with those\nof AP2. Mutations in the Arabidopsis WRINKLED1 gene lead to defects in carbohydrate metabolism and reductions in seed", " the AP2 protein was translationally regulated by the microRNA mi172 (Aukerman and Sakai, 2003; Chen, 2004). Thus, AP2 may play an important role in both floral and whole-plant development.\n [CLS] AP2 belongs to the AP2/EREBP [CLS]  family, one of the largest groups of plant transcriptional factors (Riechmann et al., 2000). It is known that AP2 suppresses expression of AGAMOUS, the C gene of a floral"]]
["seedev_train_331", [" in both transgenic Arabidopsis and tobacco (57). The increase in seed size in transgenic plants appears to result from an increase in cell number during seed development.\nThus, other  [CLS] AP2/EREBP [CLS]  proteins may function in a pathway similar to that of AP2.\n", " miniature1 mutant that is defective in the enzyme (15, 53). Thus, AP2 may affect seed mass by controlling cell-wall-bound invertase activity.\nWe note that two other members of the  [CLS] AP2/EREBP [CLS]  transcription factor family have roles that appear to intersect with those\nof AP2. Mutations in the Arabidopsis WRINKLED1 gene lead to defects in carbohydrate metabolism and reductions in seed", " [CLS] AP2/EREBP [CLS]  transcription factor (24, 25). Here, we show that loss-of-function ap2 mutants produce large seeds. Our studies using an allelic series of mutants provide strong support that AP2 functions directly"]]
["seedev_train_332", [" [CLS] AP2 was identified originally as a homeotic gene required for the specification of floral organ identity and was shown to encode\nan AP2/EREBP [CLS]  transcription factor (24, 25). Here, we show that loss-of-function ap2 mutants produce large seeds. Our studies using an allelic series of mutants provide strong support that AP2 functions directly"]]
["seedev_train_333", [" of reciprocal crosses in several crop species\nshowing that seed mass is often influenced by the genotype of the maternal plant (41). One interpretation of our result is that  [CLS] AP2 activity in maternal tissues, potentially including the seed coat, is more important than its activity in the embryo [CLS]  and\nendosperm in controlling seed mass. Alternatively, because the maternal plant contributes two genome equivalents to the triploid\nendosperm, seed mass may be affected by AP2 gene dosage in", " mays) ortholog VP1 develop normally, but have dramatically altered ABA-dependent gene expression in vegetative tissues (Parcy et al., 1994; Suzuki et al., 2001).\nA major function of the LEC2,  [CLS] FUS3, and ABI3 B3 transcription factors is activation of genes involved in accumulation of storage protein and lipid reserves in the embryo [CLS] \nduring seed maturation. Activation of downstream genes is mediated by specific binding of the B3 domain (Suzuki et al., 1997; Kroj et al., 2003; Carranco et al., 2004; Monke", " (Zea mays) ortholog VP1 develop normally, but have dramatically altered ABA-dependent gene expression in vegetative tissues (Parcy et al., 1994; Suzuki et al., 2001).\nA major function of the  [CLS] LEC2, FUS3, and ABI3 B3 transcription factors is activation of genes involved in accumulation of storage protein and lipid reserves in the embryo [CLS] \nduring seed maturation. Activation of downstream genes is mediated by specific binding of the B3 domain (Suzuki et al., 1997; Kroj et al., 2003; Carranco et al., 2004; Monke"]]
["seedev_train_334", [" of reciprocal crosses in several crop species\nshowing that seed mass is often influenced by the genotype of the maternal plant (41). One interpretation of our result is that  [CLS] AP2 activity in maternal tissues [CLS] , potentially including the seed coat, is more important than its activity in the embryo and\nendosperm in controlling seed mass. Alternatively, because the maternal plant contributes two genome equivalents", "\nalthough AP2 does appear to colocalize to a QTL affecting seed mass at the bottom of chromosome IV (13). Conversely, a recent study used genetic experiments to conclude that  [CLS] AP2 acts through both the endosperm and maternal tissues [CLS]  to affect seed size (40).\nThe endosperm has been implicated to serve as the site of parent-of-origin effects on seed mass through the imprinting of\ngenes thought to be"]]
["seedev_train_335", [" of reciprocal crosses in several crop species\nshowing that seed mass is often influenced by the genotype of the maternal plant (41). One interpretation of our result is that  [CLS] AP2 activity in maternal tissues, potentially including the seed coat, is more important than its activity in the embryo and\nendosperm [CLS]  in controlling seed mass. Alternatively, because the maternal plant contributes two genome equivalents to the triploid\nendosperm, seed mass may be affected by AP2 gene dosage in the endosperm.", " activity in the embryo and\nendosperm in controlling seed mass. Alternatively, because the maternal plant contributes two genome equivalents to the triploid\nendosperm, seed mass may be affected by  [CLS] AP2 gene dosage in the endosperm [CLS] . A QTL analysis of small- and large-seeded Arabidopsis ecotypes suggests that maternal tissues are important in determining seed mass (13). A number of QTL affecting seed mass colocalized with", "\nalthough AP2 does appear to colocalize to a QTL affecting seed mass at the bottom of chromosome IV (13). Conversely, a recent study used genetic experiments to conclude that  [CLS] AP2 acts through both the endosperm [CLS]  and maternal tissues to affect seed size (40).\nThe endosperm has been implicated to serve as the site of parent-of-origin effects on seed mass through the imprinting of\ngenes"]]
["seedev_train_336", [" example, sporophytic mutations in cereals that affect development\nof a specialized seed coat tissue responsible for nutrient transfer to the endosperm cause defects in seed development and\nsize (46\u201348).  [CLS] ap2 mutants have defective seed coats in that they lack epidermal plateaus and mucilage [CLS] , their outer integument cells are larger\nthan those of wild type and are irregular in shape, and mutant seeds are hypersensitive to bleach (24, 49). Although it is not"]]
["seedev_train_337", [" appear to intersect with those\nof AP2. Mutations in the Arabidopsis WRINKLED1 gene lead to defects in carbohydrate metabolism and reductions in seed mass and oil content (38, 54).  [CLS] Arabidopsis AINTEGUMENTA [CLS]  gene is thought to play a role in controlling cell proliferation (55, 56). Ectopic expression of AINTEGUMENTA caused plant organs, including seeds, to increase in size in both transgenic"]]
["seedev_train_338", [" transported from photosynthetic\norgans to the seed coat, a maternally derived structure, where it is metabolized differently early and late in embryogenesis\n(14, 50\u201352). During the early phase of  [CLS] favabean seed development, cell-wall-bound invertases [CLS]  localized in thin-walled parenchyma, the\ninnermost seed coat tissue, hydrolyze sucrose. Hexoses formed by the reaction move apoplastically and are transported into\nembryo cells. Cell-wall-bound invertase activity decreases during"]]
["seedev_train_339", [" hexose/sucrose ratios remained high at 9 and 11 DAP in ap2 mutants but was very low during the same period of wild-type seed development. We speculate that the altered  [CLS] hexose/sucrose\nratios during ap2 [CLS]  mutant seed development may promote an extended period of cell division that could account for the increase in embryo cell\nnumber observed in ap2 mutants.\nAP2 is a transcription"]]
["seedev_train_340", [" ap2 mutants but was very low during the same period of wild-type seed development. We speculate that the altered hexose/sucrose\nratios during ap2 mutant seed development may promote an  [CLS] extended period of cell division that could account for the increase in embryo cell\nnumber observed in ap2 [CLS]  mutants.\nAP2 is a transcription factor. Thus, it is likely to affect seed mass by regulating the expression of other genes. Given the\ndramatic changes in hexose levels in"]]
["seedev_train_341", [" account\nfor the negative correlation between seed number and seed mass (4), ap2 mutants are expected to produce seeds larger than wild-type plants with normal fertility. We confirmed that  [CLS] reduced fertility\ndid affect seed mass and could account for \u224833% of the increase in average seed weight observed in a strong ap2 [CLS]  mutant (Table 3). However, the remaining, much larger effect of AP2 on seed mass must be attributed to factors unrelated to fertility. The early flowering of plants with strong"]]
["seedev_train_342", [" proliferation (55, 56). Ectopic expression of AINTEGUMENTA caused plant organs, including seeds, to increase in size in both transgenic Arabidopsis and tobacco (57). The increase in seed size in  [CLS] transgenic plants appears to result from an increase in cell number [CLS]  during seed development.\nThus, other AP2/EREBP proteins may function in a pathway similar to that of AP2.\n"]]
["seedev_train_343", [" defective flowers and large seeds (40). Thus, the extent of AP2 gene activity, based on its well defined role in flower development, plays a role in determining seed mass.\n [CLS] ap2 mutations negatively affect plant fertility, primarily through disruption of flower structure [CLS]  that limits the efficiency\nof self-pollination in mutant plants. Given that limited availability of resources in the maternal plant appears to account\nfor the negative correlation between seed number"]]
["seedev_train_344", [" Our experiments suggest that AP2 acts, in part, through its effects on both embryo cell number and size (Fig. 2 and Table 4). Others have shown that changes in  [CLS] cell number and size underlie ecotype variations in Arabidopsis [CLS]  seed size (13). Similar to our findings, this study of natural variation concluded that cell number differences are controlled by maternal\nfactors. However, by contrast to our results with"]]
["seedev_train_345", [" indicate that it operates through a mechanism that was not uncovered by studies\nof natural ecotype variations.\nThe seed coat has been implicated to influence seed mass. For example,  [CLS] sporophytic mutations in cereals that affect development\nof a specialized seed coat tissue responsible for nutrient transfer to the endosperm [CLS]  cause defects in seed development and\nsize (46\u201348). ap2 mutants have defective seed coats in that they lack epidermal plateaus and mucilage, their outer integument cells are larger\nthan"]]
["seedev_train_346", [" invertases. Sucrose is transported from photosynthetic\norgans to the seed coat, a maternally derived structure, where it is metabolized differently early and late in embryogenesis\n(14, 50\u201352). During the  [CLS] early phase of favabean seed development, cell-wall-bound invertases [CLS]  localized in thin-walled parenchyma, the\ninnermost seed coat tissue, hydrolyze sucrose. Hexoses formed by the reaction move apoplastically and are transported into\nembryo cells. Cell-wall-bound invertase activity decreases during"]]
["seedev_train_347", [" hexose/sucrose ratios remained high at 9 and 11 DAP in ap2 mutants but was very low during the same period of wild-type seed development. We speculate that the altered  [CLS] hexose/sucrose\nratios during ap2 mutant seed development [CLS]  may promote an extended period of cell division that could account for the increase in embryo cell\nnumber observed in ap2 mutants.\nAP2 is a transcription factor. Thus, it"]]
["seedev_train_348", [" caused plant organs, including seeds, to increase in size in both transgenic Arabidopsis and tobacco (57). The increase in seed size in transgenic plants appears to result from an  [CLS] increase in cell number during seed development [CLS] .\nThus, other AP2/EREBP proteins may function in a pathway similar to that of AP2.\n"]]
["seedev_train_349", [" Alternatively, because the maternal plant contributes two genome equivalents to the triploid\nendosperm, seed mass may be affected by AP2 gene dosage in the endosperm. A QTL analysis of  [CLS] small- and large-seeded Arabidopsis ecotypes suggests that maternal tissues are important in determining seed mass [CLS]  (13). A number of QTL affecting seed mass colocalized with QTL for maternal traits such as seed number, fruit size, and plant\nresources, suggesting that they operate through maternal"]]
["seedev_train_350", [" transported from photosynthetic\norgans to the seed coat, a maternally derived structure, where it is metabolized differently early and late in embryogenesis\n(14, 50\u201352). During the early phase of  [CLS] favabean seed development, cell-wall-bound invertases localized in thin-walled parenchyma, the\ninnermost seed coat tissue, hydrolyze sucrose [CLS] . Hexoses formed by the reaction move apoplastically and are transported into\nembryo cells. Cell-wall-bound invertase activity decreases during the late phase of seed development, and sucrose is transported\ndirectly"]]
["seedev_train_351", [" invertases. Sucrose is transported from photosynthetic\norgans to the seed coat, a maternally derived structure, where it is metabolized differently early and late in embryogenesis\n(14, 50\u201352). During the  [CLS] early phase of favabean seed development, cell-wall-bound invertases localized in thin-walled parenchyma, the\ninnermost seed coat tissue, hydrolyze sucrose [CLS] . Hexoses formed by the reaction move apoplastically and are transported into\nembryo cells. Cell-wall-bound invertase activity decreases during the late phase of seed development, and sucrose is transported\ndirectly"]]
["seedev_train_352", [" 9 and 11 DAP in ap2 mutants but was very low during the same period of wild-type seed development. We speculate that the altered hexose/sucrose\nratios during ap2 mutant  [CLS] seed development may promote an extended period of cell division [CLS]  that could account for the increase in embryo cell\nnumber observed in ap2 mutants.\nAP2 is a transcription factor. Thus, it is likely to affect seed mass by regulating", " the seed is defective in ap2 mutants.\nAP2, Seed Mass, and Soluble Sugar Metabolism. Our findings that the ap2 mutation acts maternally, potentially through the seed coat, to control  [CLS] seed mass (Table 3) and affects soluble sugar metabolism during seed development [CLS]  (Fig. 4) provide a potential explanation for the increase in embryo cell number in ap2 mutant seeds (Table 4). During seed development, modulation of hexose and sucrose levels has", " in controlling cell proliferation (55, 56). Ectopic expression of AINTEGUMENTA caused plant organs, including seeds, to increase in size in both transgenic Arabidopsis and tobacco (57). The increase in  [CLS] seed size in transgenic plants appears to result from an increase in cell number during seed development [CLS] .\nThus, other AP2/EREBP proteins may function in a pathway similar to that of AP2.\n"]]
["seedev_train_353", [" indicate that it operates through a mechanism that was not uncovered by studies\nof natural ecotype variations.\nThe seed coat has been implicated to influence seed mass. For example,  [CLS] sporophytic mutations in cereals that affect development\nof a specialized seed coat tissue responsible for nutrient transfer to the endosperm cause defects in seed development and\nsize [CLS]  (46\u201348). ap2 mutants have defective seed coats in that they lack epidermal plateaus and mucilage, their outer integument cells are larger\nthan those of wild type and are irregular"]]
["seedev_train_354", [" the maternal plant contributes two genome equivalents to the triploid\nendosperm, seed mass may be affected by AP2 gene dosage in the endosperm. A QTL analysis of small- and  [CLS] large-seeded Arabidopsis ecotypes suggests that maternal tissues are important in determining seed mass [CLS]  (13). A number of QTL affecting seed mass colocalized with QTL for maternal traits such as seed number, fruit size, and plant\nresources, suggesting that they operate through maternal"]]
["seedev_train_355", [" phase appear to correlate with\nchanges in hexose and sucrose levels.\nap2 mutations induced changes in the levels of hexose and sucrose in developing seeds. These changes resulted in  [CLS] hexose/sucrose\nratios that reached a higher maximal level in ap2 mutant seeds compared with wild-type [CLS]  seeds and that remained high for a longer period of seed development in ap2 mutants than they did in wild type (Fig. 4). For example, hexose/sucrose ratios remained high"]]
["seedev_train_356", [" mutants.\nAP2, Seed Mass, and Soluble Sugar Metabolism. Our findings that the ap2 mutation acts maternally, potentially through the seed coat, to control seed mass (Table 3) and affects  [CLS] soluble sugar metabolism during seed development [CLS]  (Fig. 4) provide a potential explanation for the increase in embryo cell number in ap2 mutant seeds (Table 4). During seed development, modulation of hexose and sucrose levels has", " expression in the seed through interaction with specific basic Leu-zipper transcription factors\nthat bind ABA response elements (Finkelstein et al., 2002). FUS3 and LEC2 are implicated in repression of  [CLS] GA biosynthesis during seed development [CLS]  (Curaba et al., 2004; Gazzarrini et al., 2004). The B3 factors themselves are regulated in part through mutual interactions, as well as unidentified region-specific signals\nwithin the embryo (Kagaya"]]
["seedev_train_357", [" in controlling cell proliferation (55, 56). Ectopic expression of AINTEGUMENTA caused plant organs, including seeds, to increase in size in both transgenic Arabidopsis and tobacco (57). The increase in  [CLS] seed size in transgenic plants [CLS]  appears to result from an increase in cell number during seed development.\nThus, other AP2/EREBP proteins may function in a pathway similar to that of AP2.\n"]]
["seedev_train_358", [" morphogenesis\nphase of seed development, whereas a higher proportion of sucrose to hexose is associated with cell expansion and seed filling\nduring the late maturation phase (14\u201316). For example,  [CLS] immature fava bean embryos cultured with high concentrations of hexose continue to undergo cell divisions [CLS] \nwhereas those cultured with high sucrose concentration enter the maturation phase (15). Thus, cell division during the morphogenesis phase and seed filling during the maturation phase appear to correlate", " morphogenesis\nphase of seed development, whereas a higher proportion of sucrose to hexose is associated with cell expansion and seed filling\nduring the late maturation phase (14\u201316). For example,  [CLS] immature fava bean embryos cultured with high concentrations of hexose continue to undergo cell divisions\nwhereas those cultured with high sucrose concentration enter the maturation phase [CLS]  (15). Thus, cell division during the morphogenesis phase and seed filling during the maturation phase appear to correlate with\nchanges in hexose and sucrose levels.\nap2 mutations induced changes"]]
["seedev_train_359", [" seeds compared with wild-type seeds and that remained high for a longer period of seed development in ap2 mutants than they did in wild type (Fig. 4). For example,  [CLS] hexose/sucrose ratios remained high at 9 and 11 DAP [CLS]  in ap2 mutants but was very low during the same period of wild-type seed development. We speculate that the altered hexose/sucrose\nratios during ap2 mutant seed development may promote"]]
["seedev_train_360", [" acts, in part, through its effects on both embryo cell number and size (Fig. 2 and Table 4). Others have shown that changes in cell number and size underlie  [CLS] ecotype variations in Arabidopsis seed size [CLS]  (13). Similar to our findings, this study of natural variation concluded that cell number differences are controlled by maternal\nfactors. However, by contrast to our results with AP2, ecotype"]]
["seedev_train_361", [" be distinguished by their appearance from the surrounding meristem cells, and stem cell function can\nonly be unambiguously identified by clonal studies (Stewart and Dermen, 1970). Expression of CLAVATA3 ( [CLS] CLV3) mRNA (Fletcher et al., 1999) that coincides with the presumed position of the apical stem cells provides an operational marker for stem cell identity\nin the shoot meristem [CLS] .\nOnly a few mutants have been isolated that specifically fail to protect shoot meristem stem cells from differentiation. One\nof the genes identified from mutant studies encodes the homeodomain"]]
["seedev_train_362", [" and functional\ncharacterization of the semidominant l28 mutant that in the homozygous state is unable to keep stem cells undifferentiated similar to the wus mutant. We show that the  [CLS] premature termination of the shoot meristem in l28 [CLS]  mutants is caused by a mutation in the APETALA2 (AP2) gene that was previously identified as one of the components of the ABC model in floral patterning, where it", " redundancy. Therefore, we performed an extensive genetic screen to\ndetect presumably rare dominant-negative mutations affecting stem cell maintenance. Here, we report the isolation and functional\ncharacterization of the semidominant  [CLS] l28 mutant that in the homozygous state is unable to keep stem cells undifferentiated [CLS]  similar to the wus mutant. We show that the premature termination of the shoot meristem in l28 mutants is caused by a mutation in the APETALA2 (AP2) gene that", " l28/+ plants have a number of phenotypes in common with ap2 loss-of-function alleles, such as early flowering, mispecified floral organs, and a reduction in shoot meristem size. By\ncontrast,  [CLS] premature termination of the shoot meristem and differentiation of the stem cells is only observed in the l28 [CLS]  allele. Wild-type AP2 is expressed in the shoot meristem at all stages, consistent with an as yet unknown function there. Our gene dosage experiments\nindicate that wild-type AP2 activity", " in common with ap2 loss-of-function alleles, such as early flowering, mispecified floral organs, and a reduction in shoot meristem size. By\ncontrast, premature termination of the shoot meristem and  [CLS] differentiation of the stem cells is only observed in the l28 [CLS]  allele. Wild-type AP2 is expressed in the shoot meristem at all stages, consistent with an as yet unknown function there. Our gene dosage experiments\nindicate that wild-type AP2 activity"]]
["seedev_train_363", [" differentiation. One\nof the genes identified from mutant studies encodes the homeodomain protein WUSCHEL (WUS). WUS is expressed in a domain underneath the stem cells termed the organizing center ( [CLS] OC) and is required and sufficient to maintain\nthe overlying stem cells undifferentiated [CLS]  (Mayer et al., 1998; Schoof et al., 2000). The stem cells in turn signal back via the CLV3 peptide to restrict the size of the OC, thereby creating a"]]
["seedev_train_364", [" presumably rare dominant-negative mutations affecting stem cell maintenance. Here, we report the isolation and functional\ncharacterization of the semidominant l28 mutant that in the homozygous state is unable to  [CLS] keep stem cells undifferentiated similar to the wus [CLS]  mutant. We show that the premature termination of the shoot meristem in l28 mutants is caused by a mutation in the APETALA2 (AP2) gene that was previously identified as"]]
["seedev_train_365", [" [CLS] Postembryonic organ formation in plants requires the maintenance of small stem cell [CLS]  pools in the shoot, floral, and root meristems\n(Weigel and J\u00fcrgens, 2002; Laux, 2003). Similar to animal stem cell systems, the meristems provide a microenvironment, the stem cell niche,"]]
["seedev_train_366", [" small stem cell pools in the shoot, floral, and root meristems\n(Weigel and J\u00fcrgens, 2002; Laux, 2003). Similar to animal stem cell systems, the meristems provide a microenvironment, the  [CLS] stem cell niche, in which differentiation\nof the resident cells [CLS]  is repressed, whereas daughter cells that leave this site undergo differentiation. In the Arabidopsis thaliana shoot meristem, the stem cells are located in the three outermost cell layers of"]]
["seedev_train_367", [" to maintain\nthe overlying stem cells undifferentiated (Mayer et al., 1998; Schoof et al., 2000). The stem cells in turn signal back via the CLV3 peptide to restrict the  [CLS] size of the OC, thereby creating a negative feedback\nloop to dynamically control the size of the stem cell population [CLS]  (Brand et al., 2000; Schoof et al., 2000). CLV3 presumably acts as an extracellular ligand of the CLV1 receptor kinase complex, which eventually leads to downregulation\nof WUS transcription"]]
["seedev_train_368", [" and is required and sufficient to maintain\nthe overlying stem cells undifferentiated (Mayer et al., 1998; Schoof et al., 2000). The stem cells in turn signal back via the  [CLS] CLV3 peptide to restrict the size of the OC [CLS] , thereby creating a negative feedback\nloop to dynamically control the size of the stem cell population (Brand et al., 2000; Schoof et al., 2000). CLV3 presumably acts as an"]]
["seedev_train_369", [" al., 1997; Stone et al., 1998; Trotochaud et al., 1999; Rojo et al., 2002; Lenhard and Laux, 2003). In floral meristems that are homologous to indeterminate shoot meristems, the  [CLS] AGAMOUS (AG [CLS] ) gene represses WUS expression late in flower development to terminate the stem cell niche after a limited number of organs have been formed\n(Lenhard et al., 2001; Lohmann et"]]
["seedev_train_370", [" cannot be distinguished by their appearance from the surrounding meristem cells, and stem cell function can\nonly be unambiguously identified by clonal studies (Stewart and Dermen, 1970). Expression of  [CLS] CLAVATA3 (CLV3 [CLS] ) mRNA (Fletcher et al., 1999) that coincides with the presumed position of the apical stem cells provides an operational marker for stem cell identity\nin the shoot meristem.\nOnly"]]
["seedev_train_371", [" keep stem cells undifferentiated similar to the wus mutant. We show that the premature termination of the shoot meristem in l28 mutants is caused by a mutation in the  [CLS] APETALA2 (AP2 [CLS] ) gene that was previously identified as one of the components of the ABC model in floral patterning, where it represses AG (Bowman et al., 1991; Drews et al., 1991),", " identity, A activity specifies sepals, A and B activities lead to petals,\nB and C activities lead to stamens, and C activity specifies carpels (Weigel and Meyerowitz, 1994).\nThe  [CLS] APETALA2 (AP2 [CLS] ) gene, which belongs to the A class of genes, exhibits several characteristics distinct from other ABC genes. Although most\nABC genes contain a MADS domain, AP2 contains two APETALA2/ethylene-responsive"]]
["seedev_train_372", [" a few mutants have been isolated that specifically fail to protect shoot meristem stem cells from differentiation. One\nof the genes identified from mutant studies encodes the homeodomain protein  [CLS] WUSCHEL (WUS [CLS] ). WUS is expressed in a domain underneath the stem cells termed the organizing center (OC) and is required and sufficient to maintain\nthe overlying stem cells undifferentiated (Mayer et"]]
["seedev_train_373", [" have been formed\n(Lenhard et al., 2001; Lohmann et al., 2001).\nThe primary shoot meristem is formed during embryo development (Barton and Poethig, 1993). In Arabidopsis, the onset of  [CLS] WUS expression in precursor cells of the OC in the 16-cell embryo [CLS]  suggests that shoot meristem formation has been initiated already\nat this stage (Mayer et al., 1998). CLV3 expression is detected from late heart stage on between the outgrowing cotyledons"]]
["seedev_train_374", [" 1997; Stone et al., 1998; Trotochaud et al., 1999; Rojo et al., 2002; Lenhard and Laux, 2003). In floral meristems that are homologous to indeterminate shoot meristems, the AGAMOUS ( [CLS] AG) gene represses WUS [CLS]  expression late in flower development to terminate the stem cell niche after a limited number of organs have been formed\n(Lenhard et al., 2001; Lohmann et al., 2001).\nThe"]]
["seedev_train_375", [" of WUS expression in precursor cells of the OC in the 16-cell embryo suggests that shoot meristem formation has been initiated already\nat this stage (Mayer et al., 1998).  [CLS] CLV3 expression is detected from late heart stage [CLS]  on between the outgrowing cotyledons (Fletcher et al., 1999). In bent cotyledon embryos, the primary shoot meristem becomes visible as a bulge of small cytoplasmic cells that after\ngermination"]]
["seedev_train_376", [" feedback\nloop to dynamically control the size of the stem cell population (Brand et al., 2000; Schoof et al., 2000). CLV3 presumably acts as an extracellular ligand of the  [CLS] CLV1 receptor kinase complex, which eventually leads to downregulation\nof WUS [CLS]  transcription in the recipient cells (Clark et al., 1997; Stone et al., 1998; Trotochaud et al., 1999; Rojo et al., 2002; Lenhard and Laux, 2003). In floral meristems that"]]
["seedev_train_377", [" mutants have been isolated that specifically fail to protect shoot meristem stem cells from differentiation. One\nof the genes identified from mutant studies encodes the homeodomain protein WUSCHEL (WUS).  [CLS] WUS is expressed in a domain underneath the stem cells termed the organizing center [CLS]  (OC) and is required and sufficient to maintain\nthe overlying stem cells undifferentiated (Mayer et al., 1998; Schoof et al., 2000). The stem cells in turn signal back via"]]
["seedev_train_378", [" the size of the OC, thereby creating a negative feedback\nloop to dynamically control the size of the stem cell population (Brand et al., 2000; Schoof et al., 2000).  [CLS] CLV3 presumably acts as an extracellular ligand of the CLV1 receptor kinase complex [CLS] , which eventually leads to downregulation\nof WUS transcription in the recipient cells (Clark et al., 1997; Stone et al., 1998; Trotochaud et al., 1999; Rojo et al., 2002; Lenhard"]]
["seedev_train_379", [" [CLS] plants requires the maintenance of small stem cell [CLS]  pools in the shoot, floral, and root meristems\n(Weigel and J\u00fcrgens, 2002; Laux, 2003). Similar to animal stem cell systems, the meristems provide a microenvironment, the stem cell niche,"]]
["seedev_train_380", [" and in the control of seed size (Jofuku et al., 2005; Ohto et al., 2005).\nIn this article, we show that maintenance of the stem cell niche in the  [CLS] primary shoot meristem requires the activity of AP2 [CLS]  and redundant factor(s) via an AG independent mechanism that involves interaction with the WUS-CLV3 feedback loop.\n"]]
["seedev_train_381", [" downregulation\nof WUS transcription in the recipient cells (Clark et al., 1997; Stone et al., 1998; Trotochaud et al., 1999; Rojo et al., 2002; Lenhard and Laux, 2003). In  [CLS] floral meristems that are homologous to indeterminate shoot meristems, the AGAMOUS (AG [CLS] ) gene represses WUS expression late in flower development to terminate the stem cell niche after a limited number of organs have been formed\n(Lenhard et al., 2001; Lohmann et", " downregulation\nof WUS transcription in the recipient cells (Clark et al., 1997; Stone et al., 1998; Trotochaud et al., 1999; Rojo et al., 2002; Lenhard and Laux, 2003). In  [CLS] floral meristems that are homologous to indeterminate shoot meristems, the AGAMOUS (AG) gene represses WUS [CLS]  expression late in flower development to terminate the stem cell niche after a limited number of organs have been formed\n(Lenhard et al., 2001; Lohmann et al., 2001).\nThe"]]
["seedev_train_382", [" [CLS] maintenance of small stem cell pools in the shoot, floral, and root meristems [CLS] \n(Weigel and J\u00fcrgens, 2002; Laux, 2003). Similar to animal stem cell systems, the meristems provide a microenvironment, the stem cell niche, in which differentiation\nof the resident cells is", " [CLS] maintenance of small stem cell pools in the shoot, floral, and root meristems [CLS] \n(Weigel and J\u00fcrgens, 2002; Laux, 2003). Similar to animal stem cell systems, the meristems provide a microenvironment, the stem cell niche, in which differentiation\nof the resident cells is", " [CLS] maintenance of small stem cell pools in the shoot, floral, and root meristems [CLS] \n(Weigel and J\u00fcrgens, 2002; Laux, 2003). Similar to animal stem cell systems, the meristems provide a microenvironment, the stem cell niche, in which differentiation\nof the resident cells is"]]
["seedev_train_383", [" 1997; Stone et al., 1998; Trotochaud et al., 1999; Rojo et al., 2002; Lenhard and Laux, 2003). In floral meristems that are homologous to indeterminate shoot meristems, the AGAMOUS ( [CLS] AG) gene represses WUS expression late in flower development [CLS]  to terminate the stem cell niche after a limited number of organs have been formed\n(Lenhard et al., 2001; Lohmann et al., 2001).\nThe primary shoot meristem is formed", " al., 1998; Trotochaud et al., 1999; Rojo et al., 2002; Lenhard and Laux, 2003). In floral meristems that are homologous to indeterminate shoot meristems, the AGAMOUS (AG) gene represses  [CLS] WUS expression late in flower development [CLS]  to terminate the stem cell niche after a limited number of organs have been formed\n(Lenhard et al., 2001; Lohmann et al., 2001).\nThe primary shoot meristem is formed"]]
["seedev_train_384", [" [CLS] Postembryonic organ formation in plants requires the maintenance of small stem cell pools in the shoot, floral, and root meristems [CLS] \n(Weigel and J\u00fcrgens, 2002; Laux, 2003). Similar to animal stem cell systems, the meristems provide a microenvironment, the stem cell niche, in which differentiation\nof the resident cells is"]]
["seedev_train_385", [" [CLS] Postembryonic organ formation in plants requires the maintenance of small stem cell pools in the shoot, floral, and root meristems [CLS] \n(Weigel and J\u00fcrgens, 2002; Laux, 2003). Similar to animal stem cell systems, the meristems provide a microenvironment, the stem cell niche, in which differentiation\nof the resident cells is"]]
["seedev_train_386", [" [CLS] Postembryonic organ formation in plants [CLS]  requires the maintenance of small stem cell pools in the shoot, floral, and root meristems\n(Weigel and J\u00fcrgens, 2002; Laux, 2003). Similar to animal stem cell systems, the meristems", " including the early acting LEC1 and L1L genes. We suggest that VAL targets Sph/RY-containing genes in the network for chromatin-mediated repression in conjunction with the PKL-related CHD3\nchromatin-remodeling factors.\n [CLS] Embryo development in plants [CLS]  is regulated by a network of transcription factors that include the LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1) and LEC1-LIKE (L1L) genes belonging to the HAP3 family CCAAT-binding factors and a subgroup"]]
["seedev_train_387", [" [CLS] Postembryonic organ formation in plants requires the maintenance of small stem cell pools in the shoot, floral, and root meristems [CLS] \n(Weigel and J\u00fcrgens, 2002; Laux, 2003). Similar to animal stem cell systems, the meristems provide a microenvironment, the stem cell niche, in which differentiation\nof the resident cells is"]]
["seedev_train_388", [" (Jofuku et al., 1994; Okamuro et al., 1997b), and in the control of seed size (Jofuku et al., 2005; Ohto et al., 2005).\nIn this article, we show that  [CLS] maintenance of the stem cell niche in the primary shoot meristem [CLS]  requires the activity of AP2 and redundant factor(s) via an AG independent mechanism that involves interaction with the WUS-CLV3 feedback loop.\n"]]
["seedev_train_389", [" of WUS expression in precursor cells of the OC in the 16-cell embryo suggests that shoot meristem formation has been initiated already\nat this stage (Mayer et al., 1998).  [CLS] CLV3 expression is detected from late heart stage on between the outgrowing cotyledons [CLS]  (Fletcher et al., 1999). In bent cotyledon embryos, the primary shoot meristem becomes visible as a bulge of small cytoplasmic cells that after\ngermination give rise to a rosette"]]
["seedev_train_390", [" [CLS] maintenance\nof undifferentiated stem cells in specific microenvironments, named stem cell niches [CLS]  (Weigel and J\u00fcrgens, 2002; Laux, 2003). Here, we identify a novel regulatory pathway in shoot meristem stem cell maintenance defined by AP2 function.\nStem Cell Maintenance Is Regulated by"]]
["seedev_train_391", [" novel regulatory pathway in shoot meristem stem cell maintenance defined by AP2 function.\nStem Cell Maintenance Is Regulated by AP2AP2 was originally identified as a floral homeotic gene encoding  [CLS] A-function of the ABC model of organ identity specification [CLS] \n(Bowman et al., 1989, 1991). Recently, it has also been implicated in floral transition and control of seed size (Okamuro et al., 1997b; Jofuku et al., 2005; Ohto et"]]
["seedev_train_392", [" size (Okamuro et al., 1997b; Jofuku et al., 2005; Ohto et al., 2005). Here, we show that l28 and l28/+ plants have a number of phenotypes in common with  [CLS] ap2 loss-of-function alleles, such as early flowering, mispecified floral organs [CLS] , and a reduction in shoot meristem size. By\ncontrast, premature termination of the shoot meristem and differentiation of the stem cells is only observed in the l28 allele. Wild-type", " size (Okamuro et al., 1997b; Jofuku et al., 2005; Ohto et al., 2005). Here, we show that l28 and l28/+ plants have a number of phenotypes in common with  [CLS] ap2 loss-of-function alleles, such as early flowering, mispecified floral organs, and a reduction in shoot meristem size [CLS] . By\ncontrast, premature termination of the shoot meristem and differentiation of the stem cells is only observed in the l28 allele. Wild-type AP2 is expressed in the shoot meristem"]]
["seedev_train_393", [" size (Okamuro et al., 1997b; Jofuku et al., 2005; Ohto et al., 2005). Here, we show that l28 and l28/+ plants have a number of phenotypes in common with  [CLS] ap2 loss-of-function alleles, such as early flowering [CLS] , mispecified floral organs, and a reduction in shoot meristem size. By\ncontrast, premature termination of the shoot meristem and differentiation of the stem cells is only observed in the"]]
["seedev_train_394", [" consistent with an as yet unknown function there. Our gene dosage experiments\nindicate that wild-type AP2 activity competes with l28 activity. A plausible interpretation of these data is that  [CLS] l28 acts as a dominant-negative allele of AP2 [CLS]  and thus identifies a novel pathway in shoot meristem development. Definite proof of this model has to await the identification\nof potential redundant factors that appear to mask AP2"]]
["seedev_train_395", [" and a reduction in shoot meristem size. By\ncontrast, premature termination of the shoot meristem and differentiation of the stem cells is only observed in the l28 allele. Wild-type  [CLS] AP2 is expressed in the shoot meristem [CLS]  at all stages, consistent with an as yet unknown function there. Our gene dosage experiments\nindicate that wild-type AP2 activity competes with l28 activity. A plausible interpretation of these", " depends on the maintenance\nof undifferentiated stem cells in specific microenvironments, named stem cell niches (Weigel and J\u00fcrgens, 2002; Laux, 2003). Here, we identify a novel regulatory pathway in  [CLS] shoot meristem stem cell maintenance defined by AP2 [CLS]  function.\nStem Cell Maintenance Is Regulated by AP2AP2 was originally identified as a floral homeotic gene encoding A-function of the ABC model of organ identity specification\n(Bowman et al.,"]]
["seedev_train_396", [" (Weigel and J\u00fcrgens, 2002; Laux, 2003). Here, we identify a novel regulatory pathway in shoot meristem stem cell maintenance defined by AP2 function.\nStem Cell Maintenance Is Regulated by AP2 [CLS] AP2 was originally identified as a floral homeotic gene encoding A-function of the ABC model [CLS]  of organ identity specification\n(Bowman et al., 1989, 1991). Recently, it has also been implicated in floral transition and control of seed size (Okamuro et al., 1997b; Jofuku et", " not been well understood (Okamuro et al., 1997).\nThe current study showed that AP2 activity repressed AtEBP, AtERF1 and AP2 expression. This is consistent with previous results showing that  [CLS] AP2 regulates its own AP2 [CLS]  expression (Okamuro et al., 1997; Chen, 2004) as well as other genes, such as the ERF genes.\nIn addition, over-expression of AtEBP increased the expression level of AP2. AtEBP", " [CLS] AP2 protein down-regulates AP2 [CLS]  and AtEBP expression (Okamuro et al., 1997; this study), as indicated in grey. In the current study, it was demonstrated that AP2 expression was regulated through AtEBP and EIN2,"]]
["seedev_train_397", [" depends on the maintenance\nof undifferentiated stem cells in specific microenvironments, named stem cell niches (Weigel and J\u00fcrgens, 2002; Laux, 2003). Here, we identify a novel regulatory pathway in  [CLS] shoot meristem stem cell maintenance [CLS]  defined by AP2 function.\nStem Cell Maintenance Is Regulated by AP2AP2 was originally identified as a floral homeotic gene encoding A-function of the ABC model of organ identity specification"]]
["seedev_train_398", [" organs, and a reduction in shoot meristem size. By\ncontrast, premature termination of the shoot meristem and differentiation of the stem cells is only observed in the l28 allele.  [CLS] Wild-type AP2 [CLS]  is expressed in the shoot meristem at all stages, consistent with an as yet unknown function there. Our gene dosage experiments\nindicate that wild-type AP2 activity competes with l28"]]
["seedev_train_399", [" protein, a member\nof the CONSTANS family, were identified as part of the SERK1 complex. Using blue native gel electrophoresis, we show that\nSERK1 and SERK3 are part of  [CLS] BRI1-containing multiple protein complexes [CLS]  with relative masses between 300 and 500 kD. The SERK1\nmutant allele serk1-1 enhances the phenotype of the weak BRI1 allele bri1-119. Collectively, these results suggest that apart from", " than the soluble proteins used previously.\nSERK1 and BR Signaling\nA highly interesting finding was the identification of two members of the BR signaling pathway, the main BR receptor  [CLS] BRI1\n(Li and Chory, 1997) and its coreceptor BAK1 (SERK3) (Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002), as components of the SERK1 complex [CLS] . This finding implies that SERK1 is a previously unrecognized element of BR signaling.\nRecently, we showed that the SERK3 receptor may have a role in the internalization of BRI1"]]
["seedev_train_400", [" AGAMOUS-LIKE15 and an uncharacterized zinc finger protein, a member\nof the CONSTANS family, were identified as part of the SERK1 complex. Using blue native gel electrophoresis, we show that\n [CLS] SERK1 and SERK3 are part of BRI1-containing multiple protein complexes [CLS]  with relative masses between 300 and 500 kD. The SERK1\nmutant allele serk1-1 enhances the phenotype of the weak BRI1 allele bri1-119. Collectively, these results suggest that apart from"]]
["seedev_train_401", [" the BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE1 (BRI1) receptor and its coreceptor,\nthe SERK3 or BRI1-ASSOCIATED KINASE1 protein. In addition, KINASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE, CDC48A, and 14-3-3\u03bd were\nfound. Finally, the MADS box transcription factor  [CLS] AGAMOUS-LIKE15 and an uncharacterized zinc finger protein, a member\nof the CONSTANS family, were identified as part of the SERK1 complex [CLS] . Using blue native gel electrophoresis, we show that\nSERK1 and SERK3 are part of BRI1-containing multiple protein complexes with relative masses between 300 and 500 kD. The SERK1\nmutant"]]
["seedev_train_402", [" an uncharacterized zinc finger protein, a member\nof the CONSTANS family, were identified as part of the SERK1 complex. Using blue native gel electrophoresis, we show that\nSERK1 and  [CLS] SERK3 are part of BRI1-containing multiple protein complexes [CLS]  with relative masses between 300 and 500 kD. The SERK1\nmutant allele serk1-1 enhances the phenotype of the weak BRI1 allele bri1-119. Collectively, these results suggest that apart from", " and serk1-2 did not have a morphological phenotype but in combination with a serk2 null mutant resulted in complete male-sterile plants (Albrecht et al., 2005; Colcombet et al., 2005).  [CLS] SERK3 or BRI1-ASSOCIATED RECEPTOR KINASE1 (BAK1) is part of the BR receptor complex [CLS]  and is proposed to function as a coreceptor\nof the BRI1 protein (Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002). Recently, we showed that in living plant cells BRI1"]]
["seedev_train_403", [" [CLS] receptor-like kinase (LRR-RLK [CLS] ) involved in the\nacquisition of embryogenic competence and in male sporogenesis. To determine the composition of the SERK1 signaling complex\nin vivo, we generated plants expressing the SERK1 protein"]]
["seedev_train_404", [" were identified\nusing liquid chromatography/matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization\u2013time of flight/mass spectrometry of the trypsin-released\npeptides. This approach identified two other LRR-RLKs, the BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE1 (BRI1) receptor and its coreceptor,\nthe  [CLS] SERK3 or BRI1-ASSOCIATED KINASE1 [CLS]  protein. In addition, KINASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE, CDC48A, and 14-3-3\u03bd were\nfound. Finally, the MADS box transcription factor AGAMOUS-LIKE15 and an uncharacterized zinc finger protein, a member\nof the CONSTANS", " ligands, and patterns of ligand and receptor\nexpression dictate which receptor\u2013ligand combination is activated (Feng and Derynck, 1997). This so-called tetrameric model was also recently proposed for BRI1 and  [CLS] BAK1 (SERK3 [CLS] ) (Wang et al., 2005b).\nOther SERK1 Complex Components\nThe presence of the PP2C phosphatase KAPP, 14-3-3\u03bd, and CDC48A in the SERK1 complex confirms previously obtained results using\nyeast two-hybrid", " an elegant demonstration of the in vivo phosphorylation properties of the BRI1 receptor\n(Wang et al., 2005a). In that work, it was clearly shown that the interaction between the  [CLS] BAK1 (SERK3 [CLS] ) proteins and BRI1 is brassinolide-dependent.\nBecause we did not apply exogenous ligands before isolation of the SERK1 complex, it is likely that only a small fraction\nof the complexes"]]
["seedev_train_405", [" immunoprecipitated from seedlings, and the coimmunoprecipitating proteins were identified\nusing liquid chromatography/matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization\u2013time of flight/mass spectrometry of the trypsin-released\npeptides. This approach identified two other LRR-RLKs, the  [CLS] BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE1 (BRI1 [CLS] ) receptor and its coreceptor,\nthe SERK3 or BRI1-ASSOCIATED KINASE1 protein. In addition, KINASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE, CDC48A, and 14-3-3\u03bd were\nfound. Finally, the MADS box transcription factor AGAMOUS-LIKE15 and an", " [CLS] BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE1 (BRI1 [CLS] ), ERECTA, rice (Oryza sativa) Xa21, HAESA-RLK5, and FLS2 genes were shown to function in shoot meristem maintenance, hormone perception, organ elongation,\ndisease resistance, abscission, and flagellin signaling, respectively (reviewed"]]
["seedev_train_406", [" [CLS] leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinase (LRR-RLK [CLS] ) involved in the\nacquisition of embryogenic competence and in male sporogenesis. To determine the composition of the SERK1 signaling complex\nin vivo, we generated plants expressing the SERK1 protein"]]
["seedev_train_407", [" [CLS] SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1 (SERK1 [CLS] ) is a leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinase (LRR-RLK) involved in the\nacquisition of embryogenic competence and in male sporogenesis. To determine the composition of the SERK1 signaling complex\nin vivo,", " (Mora-Garcia et al., 2004), respectively. Their potential substrates are the nuclear proteins BRASSINAZOLE-RESISTANT1 (BZR1) (Wang et al., 2002b) and bri1-EMS-SUPPRESSOR1 (BES1) (Yin et al., 2002).\nWe previously identified Arabidopsis  [CLS] SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1 (SERK1 [CLS] ), an LRR-RLK that marks the formation of embryogenic cells in culture\nand is expressed in ovule primordia and in both male and female gametophytes. In sporophytic tissues, SERK1 has"]]
["seedev_train_408", [" [CLS] leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinase (LRR [CLS] -RLK) involved in the\nacquisition of embryogenic competence and in male sporogenesis. To determine the composition of the SERK1 signaling complex\nin vivo, we generated plants expressing the SERK1 protein", " [CLS] leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinases (LRR [CLS] -RLKs) play important roles in plant signaling pathways. For\nexample, the Arabidopsis thaliana CLAVATA1 (CLV1), BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE1 (BRI1), ERECTA, rice (Oryza sativa) Xa21, HAESA-RLK5, and FLS2 genes were shown to function"]]
["seedev_train_409", [" complex was immunoprecipitated from seedlings, and the coimmunoprecipitating proteins were identified\nusing liquid chromatography/matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization\u2013time of flight/mass spectrometry of the trypsin-released\npeptides. This approach identified two other  [CLS] LRR-RLKs, the BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE1 (BRI1) receptor and its coreceptor,\nthe SERK3 [CLS]  or BRI1-ASSOCIATED KINASE1 protein. In addition, KINASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE, CDC48A, and 14-3-3\u03bd were\nfound. Finally, the MADS box transcription factor AGAMOUS-LIKE15 and an uncharacterized zinc finger protein, a member", " presence in the SERK1 signaling complex of CDC48A (Rienties et al., 2005) and KAPP (Shah et al., 2002). Additional proteins were also found, such as another member of the  [CLS] 14-3-3 family, 14-3-3\u03bd, SERK3 [CLS]  (BAK1) and BRI1, the MADS\nbox transcription factor AGAMOUS-LIKE15 (AGL15), and an uncharacterized zinc finger protein.\nIn particular, the interaction between SERK1 and BRI1 was confirmed by a genetic"]]
["seedev_train_410", [" complex was immunoprecipitated from seedlings, and the coimmunoprecipitating proteins were identified\nusing liquid chromatography/matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization\u2013time of flight/mass spectrometry of the trypsin-released\npeptides. This approach identified two other  [CLS] LRR-RLKs, the BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE1 (BRI1 [CLS] ) receptor and its coreceptor,\nthe SERK3 or BRI1-ASSOCIATED KINASE1 protein. In addition, KINASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE, CDC48A, and 14-3-3\u03bd were\nfound. Finally, the MADS box transcription factor AGAMOUS-LIKE15 and an", " presence in the SERK1 signaling complex of CDC48A (Rienties et al., 2005) and KAPP (Shah et al., 2002). Additional proteins were also found, such as another member of the  [CLS] 14-3-3 family, 14-3-3\u03bd, SERK3 (BAK1) and BRI1 [CLS] , the MADS\nbox transcription factor AGAMOUS-LIKE15 (AGL15), and an uncharacterized zinc finger protein.\nIn particular, the interaction between SERK1 and BRI1 was confirmed by a genetic experiment and fluorescence", " bait, rather than the soluble proteins used previously.\nSERK1 and BR Signaling\nA highly interesting finding was the identification of two members of the BR signaling pathway, the main  [CLS] BR receptor BRI1 [CLS] \n(Li and Chory, 1997) and its coreceptor BAK1 (SERK3) (Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002), as components of the SERK1 complex. This finding implies that SERK1 is"]]
["seedev_train_411", [" [CLS] leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinase [CLS]  (LRR-RLK) involved in the\nacquisition of embryogenic competence and in male sporogenesis. To determine the composition of the SERK1 signaling complex\nin vivo, we generated plants expressing the SERK1"]]
["seedev_train_412", [" [CLS] SERK1) is a leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinase [CLS]  (LRR-RLK) involved in the\nacquisition of embryogenic competence and in male sporogenesis. To determine the composition of the SERK1 signaling complex\nin vivo, we generated plants expressing the SERK1", " respectively. Their potential substrates are the nuclear proteins BRASSINAZOLE-RESISTANT1 (BZR1) (Wang et al., 2002b) and bri1-EMS-SUPPRESSOR1 (BES1) (Yin et al., 2002).\nWe previously identified Arabidopsis SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1 ( [CLS] SERK1), an LRR-RLK [CLS]  that marks the formation of embryogenic cells in culture\nand is expressed in ovule primordia and in both male and female gametophytes. In sporophytic tissues, SERK1 has a complex", " Kwaaitaal et al., 2005). Ectopic expression of SERK1 does not result in an obvious phenotype in Arabidopsis plants but increases somatic embryo formation in culture (Hecht et al., 2001).  [CLS] SERK1 is a member of a small family of five related RLKs [CLS] , all of which have five LRRs and a typical Ser-Pro\u2013rich juxtamembrane\nregion (Hecht et al., 2001). The SERK1 knockout alleles serk1-1 and serk1-2 did not have a morphological phenotype"]]
["seedev_train_413", [" identified two other LRR-RLKs, the BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE1 (BRI1) receptor and its coreceptor,\nthe SERK3 or BRI1-ASSOCIATED KINASE1 protein. In addition, KINASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE, CDC48A, and 14-3-3\u03bd were\nfound. Finally, the  [CLS] MADS box transcription factor AGAMOUS-LIKE15 [CLS]  and an uncharacterized zinc finger protein, a member\nof the CONSTANS family, were identified as part of the SERK1 complex. Using blue native gel electrophoresis, we show that\nSERK1"]]
["seedev_train_414", [" with relative masses between 300 and 500 kD. The SERK1\nmutant allele serk1-1 enhances the phenotype of the weak BRI1 allele bri1-119. Collectively, these results suggest that apart from  [CLS] SERK3, SERK1 is also involved in the brassinolide signaling pathway [CLS] .\n", " of SERK1 in the plasma membrane as well as in internalized membrane compartments (Russinova et al., 2004; Kwaaitaal et al., 2005).\nIt was proposed that BRI1 forms heterodimers with  [CLS] SERK3 to initiate BR signaling [CLS]  upon BR binding (Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002). This was recently confirmed in an elegant demonstration of the in vivo phosphorylation properties of the BRI1 receptor"]]
["seedev_train_415", [" relative masses between 300 and 500 kD. The SERK1\nmutant allele serk1-1 enhances the phenotype of the weak BRI1 allele bri1-119. Collectively, these results suggest that apart from SERK3,  [CLS] SERK1 is also involved in the brassinolide signaling pathway [CLS] .\n", " [CLS] SERK1) is a leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinase (LRR-RLK) involved in the\nacquisition of embryogenic competence and in male sporogenesis [CLS] . To determine the composition of the SERK1 signaling complex\nin vivo, we generated plants expressing the SERK1 protein fused to cyan fluorescent protein under SERK1 promoter control.\nThe membrane", " [CLS] SERK1) is a leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinase (LRR-RLK) involved in the\nacquisition of embryogenic competence [CLS]  and in male sporogenesis. To determine the composition of the SERK1 signaling complex\nin vivo, we generated plants expressing the SERK1 protein fused to cyan fluorescent protein under SERK1", " receptor BRI1\n(Li and Chory, 1997) and its coreceptor BAK1 (SERK3) (Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002), as components of the SERK1 complex. This finding implies that  [CLS] SERK1 is a previously unrecognized element of BR signaling [CLS] .\nRecently, we showed that the SERK3 receptor may have a role in the internalization of BRI1 after heterodimerization and that\nBRI1 can also form homodimers in the plasma membrane"]]
["seedev_train_416", [" [CLS] Arabidopsis thaliana SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1 (SERK1) is a leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinase [CLS]  (LRR-RLK) involved in the\nacquisition of embryogenic competence and in male sporogenesis. To determine the composition of the SERK1 signaling complex\nin vivo, we generated plants expressing the SERK1"]]
["seedev_train_417", [" [CLS] Arabidopsis thaliana SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1 (SERK1) is a leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinase [CLS]  (LRR-RLK) involved in the\nacquisition of embryogenic competence and in male sporogenesis. To determine the composition of the SERK1 signaling complex\nin vivo, we generated plants expressing the SERK1"]]
["seedev_train_418", [" [CLS] Arabidopsis thaliana SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1 (SERK1 [CLS] ) is a leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinase (LRR-RLK) involved in the\nacquisition of embryogenic competence and in male sporogenesis. To determine the composition of the SERK1 signaling complex\nin vivo,", " SERK1 is a member of a small family of five related RLKs, all of which have five LRRs and a typical Ser-Pro\u2013rich juxtamembrane\nregion (Hecht et al., 2001). The  [CLS] SERK1 knockout alleles serk1-1 and serk1-2 did not have a morphological phenotype but in combination with a serk2 null mutant [CLS]  resulted in complete male-sterile plants (Albrecht et al., 2005; Colcombet et al., 2005). SERK3 or BRI1-ASSOCIATED RECEPTOR KINASE1 (BAK1) is part of the BR receptor complex and is proposed", " SERK1 is a member of a small family of five related RLKs, all of which have five LRRs and a typical Ser-Pro\u2013rich juxtamembrane\nregion (Hecht et al., 2001). The  [CLS] SERK1 knockout alleles serk1-1 [CLS]  and serk1-2 did not have a morphological phenotype but in combination with a serk2 null mutant resulted in complete male-sterile plants (Albrecht et al., 2005; Colcombet et al., 2005).", " SERK1 is a member of a small family of five related RLKs, all of which have five LRRs and a typical Ser-Pro\u2013rich juxtamembrane\nregion (Hecht et al., 2001). The  [CLS] SERK1 knockout alleles serk1-1 and serk1-2 [CLS]  did not have a morphological phenotype but in combination with a serk2 null mutant resulted in complete male-sterile plants (Albrecht et al., 2005; Colcombet et al., 2005). SERK3 or", " in Griffiths et al., 2003). Recently, it was shown that CO accumulation is regulated by photoreceptors in photoperiodic flowering (Valverde et al.,\n2004).\nIn conclusion, we propose that in  [CLS] Arabidopsis seedlings, signaling mediated by the SERK1 [CLS]  receptor combines elements of the BR pathway with a short signal transduction\nchain, in which the plasma membrane receptor is in a complex with its cognate transcriptional regulators, such"]]
["seedev_train_419", [" as the GSK-3/Shaggy-like\nkinase called BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE2 (BIN2) (Li and Nam, 2002) and the nucleus-localized Ser/Thr phosphatase bri1 Suppressor1 family (Mora-Garcia et al., 2004), respectively. Their potential substrates are the  [CLS] nuclear proteins BRASSINAZOLE-RESISTANT1 (BZR1 [CLS] ) (Wang et al., 2002b) and bri1-EMS-SUPPRESSOR1 (BES1) (Yin et al., 2002).\nWe previously identified Arabidopsis SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1 (SERK1), an LRR-RLK that marks the formation of embryogenic cells"]]
["seedev_train_420", [" [CLS] LRR-RLKs) play important roles in plant [CLS]  signaling pathways. For\nexample, the Arabidopsis thaliana CLAVATA1 (CLV1), BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE1 (BRI1), ERECTA, rice (Oryza sativa) Xa21, HAESA-RLK5, and FLS2 genes were shown to function in shoot meristem maintenance, hormone"]]
["seedev_train_421", [" SERK1 complex(es) in vivo. We combined immunoprecipitation of cyan\nfluorescent protein (CFP)\u2013tagged SERK1 with rapid liquid chromatography (LC)/MALDI-TOF/MS\u2013based protein identification. Using\nthis method, we confirmed the presence in the  [CLS] SERK1 signaling complex of CDC48A (Rienties et al., 2005) and KAPP (Shah et al., 2002). Additional proteins were also found, such as another member of the 14-3-3 family, 14-3-3\u03bd, SERK3 [CLS]  (BAK1) and BRI1, the MADS\nbox transcription factor AGAMOUS-LIKE15 (AGL15), and an uncharacterized zinc finger protein.\nIn particular, the interaction between SERK1 and BRI1 was confirmed by a genetic", " SERK1-YFP have shown that only 15% of SERK1 exists\nas homodimers on the plasma membrane of protoplast cells (Shah et al., 2001a). Our results showed that both SERK1 and  [CLS] SERK3 heterodimerize with the BRI1 receptor, suggesting that both coreceptors can\nhave comparable activity in terms of BRI1 signaling [CLS]  and/or internalization. Another piece of evidence is that a bak1 null allele shows less severe phenotypes than bri1 loss-of-function alleles, indicating that partially redundant activity could be attributed to", "\nintegral membrane protein as a bait, rather than the soluble proteins used previously.\nSERK1 and BR Signaling\nA highly interesting finding was the identification of two members of the  [CLS] BR signaling pathway, the main BR receptor BRI1\n(Li and Chory, 1997) and its coreceptor BAK1 (SERK3 [CLS] ) (Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002), as components of the SERK1 complex. This finding implies that SERK1 is a previously unrecognized element of BR signaling.\nRecently, we"]]
["seedev_train_422", [" in an obvious phenotype in Arabidopsis plants but increases somatic embryo formation in culture (Hecht et al., 2001). SERK1 is a member of a small family of five related  [CLS] RLKs, all of which have five LRRs and a typical Ser-Pro\u2013rich juxtamembrane\nregion [CLS]  (Hecht et al., 2001). The SERK1 knockout alleles serk1-1 and serk1-2 did not have a morphological phenotype but in combination with a serk2 null mutant resulted in complete male-sterile"]]
["seedev_train_423", [" SERK1 complex(es) in vivo. We combined immunoprecipitation of cyan\nfluorescent protein (CFP)\u2013tagged SERK1 with rapid liquid chromatography (LC)/MALDI-TOF/MS\u2013based protein identification. Using\nthis method, we confirmed the presence in the  [CLS] SERK1 signaling complex of CDC48A (Rienties et al., 2005) and KAPP (Shah et al., 2002). Additional proteins were also found, such as another member of the 14-3-3 family, 14-3-3\u03bd [CLS] , SERK3 (BAK1) and BRI1, the MADS\nbox transcription factor AGAMOUS-LIKE15 (AGL15), and an uncharacterized zinc finger protein.\nIn particular, the interaction between SERK1 and BRI1 was confirmed by a"]]
["seedev_train_424", [" [CLS] RLKs) play important roles in plant [CLS]  signaling pathways. For\nexample, the Arabidopsis thaliana CLAVATA1 (CLV1), BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE1 (BRI1), ERECTA, rice (Oryza sativa) Xa21, HAESA-RLK5, and FLS2 genes were shown to function in shoot meristem maintenance, hormone", " matrix-assisted laser\ndesorption ionization\u2013time of flight/mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF/MS) was used to identify components of the epidermal growth\nfactor receptor signaling complex (Pandey et al., 2000). For only a few  [CLS] plant RLKs [CLS] , the signaling complex has been defined. One example is the 105-kD CLV1 receptor that is found\nin two distinct protein complexes of 450 and 185 kD. The larger 450-kD"]]
["seedev_train_425", [" of different signaling\npathways. For example, negative and positive regulators of brassinosteroid (BR) signaling were identified as the GSK-3/Shaggy-like\nkinase called BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE2 (BIN2) (Li and Nam, 2002) and the  [CLS] nucleus-localized Ser/Thr phosphatase bri1 Suppressor1 family [CLS]  (Mora-Garcia et al., 2004), respectively. Their potential substrates are the nuclear proteins BRASSINAZOLE-RESISTANT1 (BZR1) (Wang et al., 2002b) and bri1-EMS-SUPPRESSOR1 (BES1) (Yin et al., 2002).\nWe previously identified Arabidopsis"]]
["seedev_train_426", [" SERK1 complex(es) in vivo. We combined immunoprecipitation of cyan\nfluorescent protein (CFP)\u2013tagged SERK1 with rapid liquid chromatography (LC)/MALDI-TOF/MS\u2013based protein identification. Using\nthis method, we confirmed the presence in the  [CLS] SERK1 signaling complex of CDC48A [CLS]  (Rienties et al., 2005) and KAPP (Shah et al., 2002). Additional proteins were also found, such as another member of the 14-3-3 family, 14-3-3\u03bd, SERK3 (BAK1) and BRI1, the"]]
["seedev_train_427", ["\ninternalization (Shah et al., 2002). Using a yeast two-hybrid screen, two additional SERK1-interacting proteins, CDC48A and 14-3-3\u03bb, were found (Rienties et\nal., 2005). These interactions suggested analogy with the  [CLS] mammalian CDC48 homologue p97/VCP [CLS]  complex, in which p97/VCP can be phosphorylated\nby the JAK-2 kinase and dephosphorylated by the phosphatase PTPH1 that associates with a 14-3-3 protein (Zhang et al., 1997, 1999). KAPP"]]
["seedev_train_428", [" SERK1 complex(es) in vivo. We combined immunoprecipitation of cyan\nfluorescent protein (CFP)\u2013tagged SERK1 with rapid liquid chromatography (LC)/MALDI-TOF/MS\u2013based protein identification. Using\nthis method, we confirmed the presence in the  [CLS] SERK1 signaling complex of CDC48A (Rienties et al., 2005) and KAPP [CLS]  (Shah et al., 2002). Additional proteins were also found, such as another member of the 14-3-3 family, 14-3-3\u03bd, SERK3 (BAK1) and BRI1, the MADS\nbox transcription factor AGAMOUS-LIKE15 (AGL15),"]]
["seedev_train_429", [" [CLS] LRR-RLKs) play important roles in plant [CLS]  signaling pathways. For\nexample, the Arabidopsis thaliana CLAVATA1 (CLV1), BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE1 (BRI1), ERECTA, rice (Oryza sativa) Xa21, HAESA-RLK5, and FLS2 genes were shown to function in shoot meristem maintenance, hormone"]]
["seedev_train_430", [" EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1 (SERK1), an LRR-RLK that marks the formation of embryogenic cells in culture\nand is expressed in ovule primordia and in both male and female gametophytes. In  [CLS] sporophytic tissues, SERK1 [CLS]  has a complex\nexpression pattern, with expression being highest in the vascular tissue of all organs (Hecht et al., 2001; Albrecht et al., 2005; Kwaaitaal et al., 2005). Ectopic", " their interaction properties upon activation\nand relocalization, multiple forms of the same complex are to be expected. An indication of the presence of different complexes\nis the localization of  [CLS] SERK1 in the plasma membrane as well as in internalized membrane compartments [CLS]  (Russinova et al., 2004; Kwaaitaal et al., 2005).\nIt was proposed that BRI1 forms heterodimers with SERK3 to initiate BR signaling upon BR binding (Li et al., 2002; Nam", " Griffiths et al., 2003). Recently, it was shown that CO accumulation is regulated by photoreceptors in photoperiodic flowering (Valverde et al.,\n2004).\nIn conclusion, we propose that in Arabidopsis  [CLS] seedlings, signaling mediated by the SERK1 [CLS]  receptor combines elements of the BR pathway with a short signal transduction\nchain, in which the plasma membrane receptor is in a complex with its cognate transcriptional regulators, such", " their interaction properties upon activation\nand relocalization, multiple forms of the same complex are to be expected. An indication of the presence of different complexes\nis the localization of  [CLS] SERK1 in the plasma membrane [CLS]  as well as in internalized membrane compartments (Russinova et al., 2004; Kwaaitaal et al., 2005).\nIt was proposed that BRI1 forms heterodimers with SERK3 to initiate BR signaling upon", " the complexes we isolated are actively signaling via the SERK1 protein. This notion seems to be supported by the fact that\nmost of the BRI1 receptors were unassociated with  [CLS] SERK1 in seedlings [CLS] . Although our results do not allow us to precisely predict\nthe composition, it is likely that SERK1, SERK3, and BRI1 receptors can form tetrameric complexes analogous to the functional", " BRI1 and SERK1 as well as SERK1 and SERK3 can interact in\nthe plasma membrane of protoplasts. FRET studies between SERK1-CFP and SERK1-YFP have shown that only 15% of  [CLS] SERK1 exists\nas homodimers on the plasma membrane of protoplast cells [CLS]  (Shah et al., 2001a). Our results showed that both SERK1 and SERK3 heterodimerize with the BRI1 receptor, suggesting that both coreceptors can\nhave comparable activity in terms of BRI1", " able to\ntransphosphorylate and bind in vitro to CDC48A, 14-3-3\u03bb, and KAPP (Rienties et al., 2005). In vitro, the interactions are all phosphorylation-dependent. In vivo, it was shown that  [CLS] SERK1 interacts with KAPP only\nin intracellular vesicles [CLS] , and it was proposed to play a role in receptor internalization as well as in dephosphorylation\n(Shah et al., 2002). For two other LRR-RLKs, CLV1 (Williams et al., 1997)", " be involved in dephosphorylation, protein interaction and membrane interaction,\nand protein degradation, respectively. It is likely that they represent receptor maintenance or trafficking functions. Previously,\nit was shown that  [CLS] SERK1 could interact with 14-3-3\u03bb (Rienties et al., 2005). The results presented here suggest that the receptor preferentially interacts with 14-3-3\u03bd in seedlings [CLS]  and perhaps with\n14-3-3\u03bb in siliques, given the origin of the Arabidopsis cDNA library from young silique tissue that was used for yeast two-hybrid screening. The kinase domain of", " be involved in dephosphorylation, protein interaction and membrane interaction,\nand protein degradation, respectively. It is likely that they represent receptor maintenance or trafficking functions. Previously,\nit was shown that  [CLS] SERK1 could interact with 14-3-3\u03bb (Rienties et al., 2005). The results presented here suggest that the receptor preferentially interacts with 14-3-3\u03bd in seedlings and perhaps with\n14-3-3\u03bb in siliques [CLS] , given the origin of the Arabidopsis cDNA library from young silique tissue that was used for yeast two-hybrid screening. The kinase domain of SERK1 is able to\ntransphosphorylate and", " BRI1 after heterodimerization and that\nBRI1 can also form homodimers in the plasma membrane (Russinova et al., 2004). Further biochemical evidence comes from the finding here that BRI1 and  [CLS] SERK1 as well as SERK1 and SERK3 can interact in\nthe plasma membrane of protoplasts [CLS] . FRET studies between SERK1-CFP and SERK1-YFP have shown that only 15% of SERK1 exists\nas homodimers on the plasma membrane of protoplast cells (Shah et al., 2001a). Our results"]]
["seedev_train_431", [" SERK1 complex(es) in vivo. We combined immunoprecipitation of cyan\nfluorescent protein (CFP)\u2013tagged SERK1 with rapid liquid chromatography (LC)/MALDI-TOF/MS\u2013based protein identification. Using\nthis method, we confirmed the presence in the  [CLS] SERK1 signaling complex of CDC48A (Rienties et al., 2005) and KAPP (Shah et al., 2002). Additional proteins were also found, such as another member of the 14-3-3 family, 14-3-3\u03bd, SERK3 (BAK1) and BRI1 [CLS] , the MADS\nbox transcription factor AGAMOUS-LIKE15 (AGL15), and an uncharacterized zinc finger protein.\nIn particular, the interaction between SERK1 and BRI1 was confirmed by a genetic experiment and fluorescence", "\nintegral membrane protein as a bait, rather than the soluble proteins used previously.\nSERK1 and BR Signaling\nA highly interesting finding was the identification of two members of the  [CLS] BR signaling pathway, the main BR receptor BRI1 [CLS] \n(Li and Chory, 1997) and its coreceptor BAK1 (SERK3) (Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002), as components of the SERK1 complex. This finding implies that SERK1 is"]]
["seedev_train_432", [" in an obvious phenotype in Arabidopsis plants but increases somatic embryo formation in culture (Hecht et al., 2001). SERK1 is a member of a small family of five related  [CLS] RLKs, all of which have five LRRs [CLS]  and a typical Ser-Pro\u2013rich juxtamembrane\nregion (Hecht et al., 2001). The SERK1 knockout alleles serk1-1 and serk1-2 did not have a morphological phenotype but in combination with a serk2"]]
["seedev_train_433", [" as the GSK-3/Shaggy-like\nkinase called BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE2 (BIN2) (Li and Nam, 2002) and the nucleus-localized Ser/Thr phosphatase bri1 Suppressor1 family (Mora-Garcia et al., 2004), respectively. Their potential substrates are the  [CLS] nuclear proteins BRASSINAZOLE-RESISTANT1 (BZR1) (Wang et al., 2002b) and bri1-EMS-SUPPRESSOR1 (BES1 [CLS] ) (Yin et al., 2002).\nWe previously identified Arabidopsis SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1 (SERK1), an LRR-RLK that marks the formation of embryogenic cells in culture\nand is expressed in ovule"]]
["seedev_train_434", [" to interact with the KINASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE (KAPP) that is postulated to play a role in receptor\ninternalization (Shah et al., 2002). Using a yeast two-hybrid screen, two additional  [CLS] SERK1-interacting proteins, CDC48A and 14-3-3\u03bb [CLS] , were found (Rienties et\nal., 2005). These interactions suggested analogy with the mammalian CDC48 homologue p97/VCP complex, in which p97/VCP can be phosphorylated\nby the JAK-2 kinase and dephosphorylated"]]
["seedev_train_435", [" p97/VCP complex, in which p97/VCP can be phosphorylated\nby the JAK-2 kinase and dephosphorylated by the phosphatase PTPH1 that associates with a 14-3-3 protein (Zhang et al., 1997, 1999).  [CLS] KAPP has also been reported to interact with other LRR-RLKs such as HAESA, WALL-ASSOCIATED KINASE1, FLS2 [CLS] , and CLV1 (reviewed\nin Becraft, 2002). Transgenic studies indicate that KAPP functions as a negative regulator of CLV1 and FLS2 signaling (Williams et al., 1997; Stone et al., 1998;", " p97/VCP complex, in which p97/VCP can be phosphorylated\nby the JAK-2 kinase and dephosphorylated by the phosphatase PTPH1 that associates with a 14-3-3 protein (Zhang et al., 1997, 1999).  [CLS] KAPP has also been reported to interact with other LRR-RLKs such as HAESA [CLS] , WALL-ASSOCIATED KINASE1, FLS2, and CLV1 (reviewed\nin Becraft, 2002). Transgenic studies indicate that KAPP functions as a negative regulator of CLV1 and FLS2 signaling (Williams et al., 1997; Stone", " p97/VCP complex, in which p97/VCP can be phosphorylated\nby the JAK-2 kinase and dephosphorylated by the phosphatase PTPH1 that associates with a 14-3-3 protein (Zhang et al., 1997, 1999).  [CLS] KAPP has also been reported to interact with other LRR-RLKs such as HAESA, WALL-ASSOCIATED KINASE1, FLS2, and CLV1 [CLS]  (reviewed\nin Becraft, 2002). Transgenic studies indicate that KAPP functions as a negative regulator of CLV1 and FLS2 signaling (Williams et al., 1997; Stone et al., 1998; Gomez-Gomez et", " p97/VCP complex, in which p97/VCP can be phosphorylated\nby the JAK-2 kinase and dephosphorylated by the phosphatase PTPH1 that associates with a 14-3-3 protein (Zhang et al., 1997, 1999).  [CLS] KAPP has also been reported to interact with other LRR-RLKs such as HAESA, WALL-ASSOCIATED KINASE1 [CLS] , FLS2, and CLV1 (reviewed\nin Becraft, 2002). Transgenic studies indicate that KAPP functions as a negative regulator of CLV1 and FLS2 signaling (Williams et al., 1997; Stone et al.,"]]
["seedev_train_436", [" Recently, we showed that in living plant cells BRI1 and SERK3 interaction occurred in restricted areas of the membrane\nand recycled upon internalization by endocytosis (Russinova et al., 2004).\n [CLS] SERK1 was shown to interact with the KINASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE (KAPP [CLS] ) that is postulated to play a role in receptor\ninternalization (Shah et al., 2002). Using a yeast two-hybrid screen, two additional SERK1-interacting proteins, CDC48A and 14-3-3\u03bb, were found (Rienties", " another member of the 14-3-3 family, 14-3-3\u03bd, SERK3 (BAK1) and BRI1, the MADS\nbox transcription factor AGAMOUS-LIKE15 (AGL15), and an uncharacterized zinc finger protein.\nIn particular, the interaction between  [CLS] SERK1 and BRI1 [CLS]  was confirmed by a genetic experiment and fluorescence lifetime imaging\nmicroscopy (FLIM) to determine F\u00f6rster resonance energy transfer (FRET) between fluorescently tagged receptors. Our data show\nthat the method", " able to\ntransphosphorylate and bind in vitro to CDC48A, 14-3-3\u03bb, and KAPP (Rienties et al., 2005). In vitro, the interactions are all phosphorylation-dependent. In vivo, it was shown that  [CLS] SERK1 interacts with KAPP [CLS]  only\nin intracellular vesicles, and it was proposed to play a role in receptor internalization as well as in dephosphorylation\n(Shah et al., 2002). For two other LRR-RLKs, CLV1", " that\nBRI1 can also form homodimers in the plasma membrane (Russinova et al., 2004). Further biochemical evidence comes from the finding here that BRI1 and SERK1 as well as  [CLS] SERK1 and SERK3 [CLS]  can interact in\nthe plasma membrane of protoplasts. FRET studies between SERK1-CFP and SERK1-YFP have shown that only 15% of SERK1 exists\nas homodimers on the plasma membrane of", " be involved in dephosphorylation, protein interaction and membrane interaction,\nand protein degradation, respectively. It is likely that they represent receptor maintenance or trafficking functions. Previously,\nit was shown that  [CLS] SERK1 could interact with 14-3-3\u03bb (Rienties et al., 2005). The results presented here suggest that the receptor preferentially interacts with 14-3-3\u03bd [CLS]  in seedlings and perhaps with\n14-3-3\u03bb in siliques, given the origin of the Arabidopsis cDNA library from young silique tissue that was used for yeast two-hybrid screening. The kinase", " fact that\nmost of the BRI1 receptors were unassociated with SERK1 in seedlings. Although our results do not allow us to precisely predict\nthe composition, it is likely that  [CLS] SERK1, SERK3, and BRI1 [CLS]  receptors can form tetrameric complexes analogous to the functional\ncomplex of transforming growth factor-\u00df (TGF-\u00df) receptors. Each type of TGF-\u00df receptor is also present as a ligand-independent\ndimer on", " be involved in dephosphorylation, protein interaction and membrane interaction,\nand protein degradation, respectively. It is likely that they represent receptor maintenance or trafficking functions. Previously,\nit was shown that  [CLS] SERK1 could interact with 14-3-3\u03bb [CLS]  (Rienties et al., 2005). The results presented here suggest that the receptor preferentially interacts with 14-3-3\u03bd in seedlings and perhaps with\n14-3-3\u03bb in siliques, given the origin of the", " fact that\nmost of the BRI1 receptors were unassociated with SERK1 in seedlings. Although our results do not allow us to precisely predict\nthe composition, it is likely that  [CLS] SERK1, SERK3 [CLS] , and BRI1 receptors can form tetrameric complexes analogous to the functional\ncomplex of transforming growth factor-\u00df (TGF-\u00df) receptors. Each type of TGF-\u00df receptor is also present as a ligand-independent", " be involved in dephosphorylation, protein interaction and membrane interaction,\nand protein degradation, respectively. It is likely that they represent receptor maintenance or trafficking functions. Previously,\nit was shown that  [CLS] SERK1 could interact with 14-3-3\u03bb (Rienties et al., 2005). The results presented here suggest that the receptor preferentially interacts with 14-3-3\u03bd in seedlings and perhaps with\n14-3-3\u03bb [CLS]  in siliques, given the origin of the Arabidopsis cDNA library from young silique tissue that was used for yeast two-hybrid screening. The kinase domain of SERK1 is able to"]]
["seedev_train_437", [" to interact with the KINASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE (KAPP) that is postulated to play a role in receptor\ninternalization (Shah et al., 2002). Using a yeast two-hybrid screen, two additional  [CLS] SERK1-interacting proteins, CDC48A [CLS]  and 14-3-3\u03bb, were found (Rienties et\nal., 2005). These interactions suggested analogy with the mammalian CDC48 homologue p97/VCP complex, in which p97/VCP can be phosphorylated\nby the JAK-2 kinase"]]
["seedev_train_438", [" et\nal., 2005). These interactions suggested analogy with the mammalian CDC48 homologue p97/VCP complex, in which p97/VCP can be phosphorylated\nby the JAK-2 kinase and dephosphorylated by the phosphatase  [CLS] PTPH1 that associates with a 14-3-3 protein [CLS]  (Zhang et al., 1997, 1999). KAPP has also been reported to interact with other LRR-RLKs such as HAESA, WALL-ASSOCIATED KINASE1, FLS2, and CLV1 (reviewed\nin Becraft, 2002). Transgenic studies"]]
["seedev_train_439", [" and serk1-2 did not have a morphological phenotype but in combination with a serk2 null mutant resulted in complete male-sterile plants (Albrecht et al., 2005; Colcombet et al., 2005).  [CLS] SERK3 or BRI1-ASSOCIATED RECEPTOR KINASE1 (BAK1) is part of the BR receptor complex and is proposed to function as a coreceptor\nof the BRI1 [CLS]  protein (Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002). Recently, we showed that in living plant cells BRI1 and SERK3 interaction occurred in restricted areas of the membrane\nand", " that\nmost of the BRI1 receptors were unassociated with SERK1 in seedlings. Although our results do not allow us to precisely predict\nthe composition, it is likely that SERK1,  [CLS] SERK3, and BRI1 [CLS]  receptors can form tetrameric complexes analogous to the functional\ncomplex of transforming growth factor-\u00df (TGF-\u00df) receptors. Each type of TGF-\u00df receptor is also present as a ligand-independent\ndimer on"]]
["seedev_train_440", [" complex and is proposed to function as a coreceptor\nof the BRI1 protein (Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002). Recently, we showed that in living plant cells  [CLS] BRI1 and SERK3 [CLS]  interaction occurred in restricted areas of the membrane\nand recycled upon internalization by endocytosis (Russinova et al., 2004).\nSERK1 was shown to interact with the KINASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE (KAPP)", " internalization of BRI1 after heterodimerization and that\nBRI1 can also form homodimers in the plasma membrane (Russinova et al., 2004). Further biochemical evidence comes from the finding here that  [CLS] BRI1 and SERK1 [CLS]  as well as SERK1 and SERK3 can interact in\nthe plasma membrane of protoplasts. FRET studies between SERK1-CFP and SERK1-YFP have shown that only 15% of SERK1 exists\nas"]]
["seedev_train_441", [" complex and is proposed to function as a coreceptor\nof the BRI1 protein (Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002). Recently, we showed that in living plant cells  [CLS] BRI1 and SERK3 interaction occurred in restricted areas of the membrane\nand recycled upon internalization by endocytosis [CLS]  (Russinova et al., 2004).\nSERK1 was shown to interact with the KINASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE (KAPP) that is postulated to play a role in receptor\ninternalization (Shah et al., 2002).", " is proposed to function as a coreceptor\nof the BRI1 protein (Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002). Recently, we showed that in living plant cells BRI1 and  [CLS] SERK3 interaction occurred in restricted areas of the membrane\nand recycled upon internalization by endocytosis [CLS]  (Russinova et al., 2004).\nSERK1 was shown to interact with the KINASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE (KAPP) that is postulated to play a role in receptor\ninternalization (Shah et al., 2002)."]]
["seedev_train_442", [" respectively. Their potential substrates are the nuclear proteins BRASSINAZOLE-RESISTANT1 (BZR1) (Wang et al., 2002b) and bri1-EMS-SUPPRESSOR1 (BES1) (Yin et al., 2002).\nWe previously identified Arabidopsis SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1 ( [CLS] SERK1), an LRR-RLK that marks the formation of embryogenic cells in culture\nand is expressed in ovule primordia [CLS]  and in both male and female gametophytes. In sporophytic tissues, SERK1 has a complex\nexpression pattern, with expression being highest in the vascular tissue of all organs (Hecht et"]]
["seedev_train_443", [" KINASE1 (SERK1), an LRR-RLK that marks the formation of embryogenic cells in culture\nand is expressed in ovule primordia and in both male and female gametophytes. In sporophytic tissues,  [CLS] SERK1 has a complex\nexpression pattern, with expression being highest in the vascular tissue [CLS]  of all organs (Hecht et al., 2001; Albrecht et al., 2005; Kwaaitaal et al., 2005). Ectopic expression of SERK1 does not result in an obvious phenotype in Arabidopsis plants"]]
["seedev_train_444", [" respectively. Their potential substrates are the nuclear proteins BRASSINAZOLE-RESISTANT1 (BZR1) (Wang et al., 2002b) and bri1-EMS-SUPPRESSOR1 (BES1) (Yin et al., 2002).\nWe previously identified Arabidopsis SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1 ( [CLS] SERK1), an LRR-RLK that marks the formation of embryogenic cells in culture\nand is expressed in ovule primordia and in both male and female gametophytes [CLS] . In sporophytic tissues, SERK1 has a complex\nexpression pattern, with expression being highest in the vascular tissue of all organs (Hecht et al., 2001; Albrecht et al., 2005; Kwaaitaal"]]
["seedev_train_445", [" respectively. Their potential substrates are the nuclear proteins BRASSINAZOLE-RESISTANT1 (BZR1) (Wang et al., 2002b) and bri1-EMS-SUPPRESSOR1 (BES1) (Yin et al., 2002).\nWe previously identified Arabidopsis SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1 ( [CLS] SERK1), an LRR-RLK that marks the formation of embryogenic cells in culture\nand is expressed in ovule primordia and in both male and female gametophytes [CLS] . In sporophytic tissues, SERK1 has a complex\nexpression pattern, with expression being highest in the vascular tissue of all organs (Hecht et al., 2001; Albrecht et al., 2005; Kwaaitaal"]]
["seedev_train_446", [" and KAPP (Shah et al., 2002). Additional proteins were also found, such as another member of the 14-3-3 family, 14-3-3\u03bd, SERK3 (BAK1) and BRI1, the MADS\nbox transcription factor  [CLS] AGAMOUS-LIKE15 (AGL15 [CLS] ), and an uncharacterized zinc finger protein.\nIn particular, the interaction between SERK1 and BRI1 was confirmed by a genetic experiment and fluorescence lifetime imaging\nmicroscopy (FLIM) to determine F\u00f6rster"]]
["seedev_train_447", [" and serk1-2 did not have a morphological phenotype but in combination with a serk2 null mutant resulted in complete male-sterile plants (Albrecht et al., 2005; Colcombet et al., 2005).  [CLS] SERK3 or BRI1-ASSOCIATED RECEPTOR KINASE1 (BAK1 [CLS] ) is part of the BR receptor complex and is proposed to function as a coreceptor\nof the BRI1 protein (Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002). Recently, we", " did not have a morphological phenotype but in combination with a serk2 null mutant resulted in complete male-sterile plants (Albrecht et al., 2005; Colcombet et al., 2005). SERK3 or  [CLS] BRI1-ASSOCIATED RECEPTOR KINASE1 (BAK1 [CLS] ) is part of the BR receptor complex and is proposed to function as a coreceptor\nof the BRI1 protein (Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002). Recently, we", " SERK1 signaling complex of CDC48A (Rienties et al., 2005) and KAPP (Shah et al., 2002). Additional proteins were also found, such as another member of the 14-3-3 family, 14-3-3\u03bd,  [CLS] SERK3 (BAK1 [CLS] ) and BRI1, the MADS\nbox transcription factor AGAMOUS-LIKE15 (AGL15), and an uncharacterized zinc finger protein.\nIn particular, the interaction between SERK1 and BRI1 was confirmed by a genetic experiment"]]
["seedev_train_448", [" [CLS] receptor-like kinases (LRR-RLKs [CLS] ) play important roles in plant signaling pathways. For\nexample, the Arabidopsis thaliana CLAVATA1 (CLV1), BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE1 (BRI1), ERECTA, rice (Oryza sativa) Xa21, HAESA-RLK5, and FLS2 genes were shown to function"]]
["seedev_train_449", [" studies have been undertaken to identify additional components of different signaling\npathways. For example, negative and positive regulators of brassinosteroid (BR) signaling were identified as the GSK-3/Shaggy-like\nkinase called  [CLS] BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE2 (BIN2 [CLS] ) (Li and Nam, 2002) and the nucleus-localized Ser/Thr phosphatase bri1 Suppressor1 family (Mora-Garcia et al., 2004), respectively. Their potential substrates are the nuclear proteins BRASSINAZOLE-RESISTANT1 (BZR1) (Wang et al.,"]]
["seedev_train_450", [" Nam, 2002) and the nucleus-localized Ser/Thr phosphatase bri1 Suppressor1 family (Mora-Garcia et al., 2004), respectively. Their potential substrates are the nuclear proteins BRASSINAZOLE-RESISTANT1 (BZR1) (Wang et al., 2002b) and  [CLS] bri1-EMS-SUPPRESSOR1 (BES1 [CLS] ) (Yin et al., 2002).\nWe previously identified Arabidopsis SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1 (SERK1), an LRR-RLK that marks the formation of embryogenic cells in culture\nand is expressed in ovule"]]
["seedev_train_451", [" [CLS] leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinases (LRR-RLKs [CLS] ) play important roles in plant signaling pathways. For\nexample, the Arabidopsis thaliana CLAVATA1 (CLV1), BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE1 (BRI1), ERECTA, rice (Oryza sativa) Xa21, HAESA-RLK5, and FLS2 genes were shown to function"]]
["seedev_train_452", [" [CLS] CLAVATA1 (CLV1 [CLS] ), BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE1 (BRI1), ERECTA, rice (Oryza sativa) Xa21, HAESA-RLK5, and FLS2 genes were shown to function in shoot meristem maintenance, hormone perception, organ elongation,\ndisease resistance, abscission, and flagellin signaling,"]]
["seedev_train_453", [" GSK-3/Shaggy-like\nkinase called BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE2 (BIN2) (Li and Nam, 2002) and the nucleus-localized Ser/Thr phosphatase bri1 Suppressor1 family (Mora-Garcia et al., 2004), respectively. Their potential substrates are the nuclear proteins  [CLS] BRASSINAZOLE-RESISTANT1 (BZR1 [CLS] ) (Wang et al., 2002b) and bri1-EMS-SUPPRESSOR1 (BES1) (Yin et al., 2002).\nWe previously identified Arabidopsis SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1 (SERK1), an LRR-RLK that marks the formation of embryogenic cells"]]
["seedev_train_454", [" cells BRI1 and SERK3 interaction occurred in restricted areas of the membrane\nand recycled upon internalization by endocytosis (Russinova et al., 2004).\nSERK1 was shown to interact with the  [CLS] KINASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE (KAPP [CLS] ) that is postulated to play a role in receptor\ninternalization (Shah et al., 2002). Using a yeast two-hybrid screen, two additional SERK1-interacting proteins, CDC48A and 14-3-3\u03bb, were found (Rienties"]]
["seedev_train_455", [" includes KAPP and a Rho GTPase-related protein (Trotochaud et al., 1999).\nIn this study, we have determined the composition of the SERK1 complex(es) in vivo. We combined immunoprecipitation of  [CLS] cyan\nfluorescent protein (CFP [CLS] )\u2013tagged SERK1 with rapid liquid chromatography (LC)/MALDI-TOF/MS\u2013based protein identification. Using\nthis method, we confirmed the presence in the SERK1 signaling complex of CDC48A (Rienties et al., 2005) and KAPP (Shah"]]
["seedev_train_456", [" [CLS] HAESA-RLK5 [CLS] , and FLS2 genes were shown to function in shoot meristem maintenance, hormone perception, organ elongation,\ndisease resistance, abscission, and flagellin signaling, respectively (reviewed in Torii, 2004). Extensive genetic and"]]
["seedev_train_457", [" (Shah et al., 2002). Using a yeast two-hybrid screen, two additional SERK1-interacting proteins, CDC48A and 14-3-3\u03bb, were found (Rienties et\nal., 2005). These interactions suggested analogy with the mammalian  [CLS] CDC48 homologue p97/VCP [CLS]  complex, in which p97/VCP can be phosphorylated\nby the JAK-2 kinase and dephosphorylated by the phosphatase PTPH1 that associates with a 14-3-3 protein (Zhang et al., 1997, 1999). KAPP"]]
["seedev_train_458", [" (Rienties et\nal., 2005). These interactions suggested analogy with the mammalian CDC48 homologue p97/VCP complex, in which p97/VCP can be phosphorylated\nby the JAK-2 kinase and dephosphorylated by the  [CLS] phosphatase PTPH1 [CLS]  that associates with a 14-3-3 protein (Zhang et al., 1997, 1999). KAPP has also been reported to interact with other LRR-RLKs such as HAESA, WALL-ASSOCIATED KINASE1, FLS2, and CLV1"]]
["seedev_train_459", [" the JAK-2 kinase and dephosphorylated by the phosphatase PTPH1 that associates with a 14-3-3 protein (Zhang et al., 1997, 1999). KAPP has also been reported to interact with other  [CLS] LRR-RLKs such as HAESA, WALL-ASSOCIATED KINASE1, FLS2 [CLS] , and CLV1 (reviewed\nin Becraft, 2002). Transgenic studies indicate that KAPP functions as a negative regulator of CLV1 and FLS2 signaling (Williams et al., 1997; Stone et al., 1998;", " with KAPP only\nin intracellular vesicles, and it was proposed to play a role in receptor internalization as well as in dephosphorylation\n(Shah et al., 2002). For two other  [CLS] LRR-RLKs, CLV1 (Williams et al., 1997) and FLS2 [CLS]  (Gomez-Gomez et al., 2001), it has been shown that KAPP functions as a negative regulator, and it may have the same role in controlling signaling through\nthe SERK1 receptor."]]
["seedev_train_460", [" to interact with the KINASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE (KAPP) that is postulated to play a role in receptor\ninternalization (Shah et al., 2002). Using a yeast two-hybrid screen, two additional  [CLS] SERK1-interacting proteins, CDC48A and 14-3-3\u03bb [CLS] , were found (Rienties et\nal., 2005). These interactions suggested analogy with the mammalian CDC48 homologue p97/VCP complex, in which p97/VCP can be phosphorylated\nby the JAK-2 kinase and dephosphorylated", " the plant endoplasmic reticulum\u2013associated protein degradation system (Muller et al., 2005).\nPlant 14-3-3 proteins have also been found associated with G-box transcription factors (Lu et al., 1992). Five Arabidopsis  [CLS] 14-3-3s, including 14-3-3\u03bb [CLS] , have been shown to interact with other transcription factors (Pan et al., 1999), and current models propose that the interaction with members of the 14-3-3 family is client-driven (Paul"]]
["seedev_train_461", [" the JAK-2 kinase and dephosphorylated by the phosphatase PTPH1 that associates with a 14-3-3 protein (Zhang et al., 1997, 1999). KAPP has also been reported to interact with other  [CLS] LRR-RLKs such as HAESA, WALL-ASSOCIATED KINASE1, FLS2, and CLV1 [CLS]  (reviewed\nin Becraft, 2002). Transgenic studies indicate that KAPP functions as a negative regulator of CLV1 and FLS2 signaling (Williams et al., 1997; Stone et al., 1998; Gomez-Gomez et", " with KAPP only\nin intracellular vesicles, and it was proposed to play a role in receptor internalization as well as in dephosphorylation\n(Shah et al., 2002). For two other  [CLS] LRR-RLKs, CLV1 [CLS]  (Williams et al., 1997) and FLS2 (Gomez-Gomez et al., 2001), it has been shown that KAPP functions as a negative regulator, and it may have the same role in"]]
["seedev_train_462", [" genetic and biochemical studies have been undertaken to identify additional components of different signaling\npathways. For example, negative and positive regulators of brassinosteroid (BR) signaling were identified as the  [CLS] GSK-3/Shaggy-like\nkinase called BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE2 (BIN2 [CLS] ) (Li and Nam, 2002) and the nucleus-localized Ser/Thr phosphatase bri1 Suppressor1 family (Mora-Garcia et al., 2004), respectively. Their potential substrates are the nuclear proteins BRASSINAZOLE-RESISTANT1 (BZR1) (Wang et al.,"]]
["seedev_train_463", [" the JAK-2 kinase and dephosphorylated by the phosphatase PTPH1 that associates with a 14-3-3 protein (Zhang et al., 1997, 1999). KAPP has also been reported to interact with other  [CLS] LRR-RLKs such as HAESA, WALL-ASSOCIATED KINASE1 [CLS] , FLS2, and CLV1 (reviewed\nin Becraft, 2002). Transgenic studies indicate that KAPP functions as a negative regulator of CLV1 and FLS2 signaling (Williams et al., 1997; Stone et al.,"]]
["seedev_train_464", [" proteins, CDC48A and 14-3-3\u03bb, were found (Rienties et\nal., 2005). These interactions suggested analogy with the mammalian CDC48 homologue p97/VCP complex, in which p97/VCP can be phosphorylated\nby the  [CLS] JAK-2 kinase [CLS]  and dephosphorylated by the phosphatase PTPH1 that associates with a 14-3-3 protein (Zhang et al., 1997, 1999). KAPP has also been reported to interact with other LRR-RLKs such as"]]
["seedev_train_465", [" high sensitivity by specific proteolytic digestion and determination of\nthe peptide masses by mass spectrometry. This technique has been used for a systematic study of multiprotein complexes. For\nthe  [CLS] epidermal growth factor receptor, a human receptor Tyr kinase [CLS] , immunoprecipitation combined with matrix-assisted laser\ndesorption ionization\u2013time of flight/mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF/MS) was used to identify components of the epidermal growth\nfactor receptor signaling complex (Pandey et al., 2000). For"]]
["seedev_train_466", [" to interact with the KINASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE (KAPP) that is postulated to play a role in receptor\ninternalization (Shah et al., 2002). Using a yeast two-hybrid screen, two additional  [CLS] SERK1-interacting proteins, CDC48A [CLS]  and 14-3-3\u03bb, were found (Rienties et\nal., 2005). These interactions suggested analogy with the mammalian CDC48 homologue p97/VCP complex, in which p97/VCP can be phosphorylated\nby the JAK-2 kinase", " (Feng and Derynck, 1997). This so-called tetrameric model was also recently proposed for BRI1 and BAK1 (SERK3) (Wang et al., 2005b).\nOther SERK1 Complex Components\nThe presence of the  [CLS] PP2C phosphatase KAPP, 14-3-3\u03bd, and CDC48A [CLS]  in the SERK1 complex confirms previously obtained results using\nyeast two-hybrid screening and in vitro interaction\nstudies (Rienties et al., 2005). Collectively, these proteins appear to be involved in"]]
["seedev_train_467", [" the JAK-2 kinase and dephosphorylated by the phosphatase PTPH1 that associates with a 14-3-3 protein (Zhang et al., 1997, 1999). KAPP has also been reported to interact with other  [CLS] LRR-RLKs such as HAESA [CLS] , WALL-ASSOCIATED KINASE1, FLS2, and CLV1 (reviewed\nin Becraft, 2002). Transgenic studies indicate that KAPP functions as a negative regulator of CLV1 and FLS2 signaling (Williams et al., 1997; Stone"]]
["seedev_train_468", [" presence in the SERK1 signaling complex of CDC48A (Rienties et al., 2005) and KAPP (Shah et al., 2002). Additional proteins were also found, such as another member of the  [CLS] 14-3-3 family, 14-3-3\u03bd [CLS] , SERK3 (BAK1) and BRI1, the MADS\nbox transcription factor AGAMOUS-LIKE15 (AGL15), and an uncharacterized zinc finger protein.\nIn particular, the interaction between SERK1 and BRI1 was confirmed by a", " (Feng and Derynck, 1997). This so-called tetrameric model was also recently proposed for BRI1 and BAK1 (SERK3) (Wang et al., 2005b).\nOther SERK1 Complex Components\nThe presence of the  [CLS] PP2C phosphatase KAPP, 14-3-3\u03bd [CLS] , and CDC48A in the SERK1 complex confirms previously obtained results using\nyeast two-hybrid screening and in vitro interaction\nstudies (Rienties et al., 2005). Collectively, these proteins appear to be"]]
["seedev_train_469", [" yeast two-hybrid screen, two additional SERK1-interacting proteins, CDC48A and 14-3-3\u03bb, were found (Rienties et\nal., 2005). These interactions suggested analogy with the mammalian CDC48 homologue p97/VCP complex, in which  [CLS] p97/VCP can be phosphorylated\nby the JAK-2 [CLS]  kinase and dephosphorylated by the phosphatase PTPH1 that associates with a 14-3-3 protein (Zhang et al., 1997, 1999). KAPP has also been reported to interact with other LRR-RLKs such"]]
["seedev_train_470", [" [CLS] FLS2 genes were shown to function in shoot meristem maintenance, hormone perception, organ elongation,\ndisease resistance, abscission, and flagellin signaling [CLS] , respectively (reviewed in Torii, 2004). Extensive genetic and biochemical studies have been undertaken to identify additional components of different signaling\npathways. For example, negative and positive regulators of brassinosteroid"]]
["seedev_train_471", [" [CLS] Xa21, HAESA-RLK5, and FLS2 genes were shown to function in shoot meristem maintenance, hormone perception, organ elongation,\ndisease resistance [CLS] , abscission, and flagellin signaling, respectively (reviewed in Torii, 2004). Extensive genetic and biochemical studies have been undertaken to identify additional components of different signaling\npathways. For example, negative and"]]
["seedev_train_472", [" al., 1997, 1999). KAPP has also been reported to interact with other LRR-RLKs such as HAESA, WALL-ASSOCIATED KINASE1, FLS2, and CLV1 (reviewed\nin Becraft, 2002). Transgenic studies indicate that  [CLS] KAPP functions as a negative regulator of CLV1 and FLS2 signaling [CLS]  (Williams et al., 1997; Stone et al., 1998; Gomez-Gomez et al., 2001).\nIdentification of proteins can now be performed at high sensitivity by specific proteolytic digestion and determination of", " al., 1997, 1999). KAPP has also been reported to interact with other LRR-RLKs such as HAESA, WALL-ASSOCIATED KINASE1, FLS2, and CLV1 (reviewed\nin Becraft, 2002). Transgenic studies indicate that  [CLS] KAPP functions as a negative regulator of CLV1 and FLS2 signaling [CLS]  (Williams et al., 1997; Stone et al., 1998; Gomez-Gomez et al., 2001).\nIdentification of proteins can now be performed at high sensitivity by specific proteolytic digestion and determination of", " as well as in dephosphorylation\n(Shah et al., 2002). For two other LRR-RLKs, CLV1 (Williams et al., 1997) and FLS2 (Gomez-Gomez et al., 2001), it has been shown that  [CLS] KAPP functions as a negative regulator, and it may have the same role in controlling signaling through\nthe SERK1 receptor [CLS] .\nCDC48 protein assembles mainly in hexameric forms (Rancour et al., 2002). In Arabidopsis suspension-cultured cells, soluble (cytosolic) CDC48A was found in a high molecular mass protein of 640 kD."]]
["seedev_train_473", [" signaling, respectively (reviewed in Torii, 2004). Extensive genetic and biochemical studies have been undertaken to identify additional components of different signaling\npathways. For example, negative and positive regulators of  [CLS] brassinosteroid (BR) signaling were identified as the GSK-3/Shaggy-like\nkinase called BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE2 (BIN2) (Li and Nam, 2002) and the nucleus-localized Ser/Thr phosphatase bri1 Suppressor1 family [CLS]  (Mora-Garcia et al., 2004), respectively. Their potential substrates are the nuclear proteins BRASSINAZOLE-RESISTANT1 (BZR1) (Wang et al., 2002b) and bri1-EMS-SUPPRESSOR1 (BES1) (Yin et al., 2002).\nWe previously identified Arabidopsis"]]
["seedev_train_474", [" signaling, respectively (reviewed in Torii, 2004). Extensive genetic and biochemical studies have been undertaken to identify additional components of different signaling\npathways. For example, negative and positive regulators of  [CLS] brassinosteroid (BR) signaling were identified as the GSK-3/Shaggy-like\nkinase called BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE2 (BIN2 [CLS] ) (Li and Nam, 2002) and the nucleus-localized Ser/Thr phosphatase bri1 Suppressor1 family (Mora-Garcia et al., 2004), respectively. Their potential substrates are the nuclear proteins BRASSINAZOLE-RESISTANT1 (BZR1) (Wang et al.,"]]
["seedev_train_475", [" [CLS] BRI1), ERECTA, rice (Oryza sativa) Xa21, HAESA-RLK5, and FLS2 genes were shown to function in shoot meristem maintenance, hormone perception [CLS] , organ elongation,\ndisease resistance, abscission, and flagellin signaling, respectively (reviewed in Torii, 2004). Extensive genetic and biochemical studies have been undertaken to identify additional components of different signaling\npathways.", " complexes\nis the localization of SERK1 in the plasma membrane as well as in internalized membrane compartments (Russinova et al., 2004; Kwaaitaal et al., 2005).\nIt was proposed that  [CLS] BRI1 forms heterodimers with SERK3 to initiate BR signaling [CLS]  upon BR binding (Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002). This was recently confirmed in an elegant demonstration of the in vivo phosphorylation properties of the BRI1 receptor"]]
["seedev_train_476", [" SERK1 has a complex\nexpression pattern, with expression being highest in the vascular tissue of all organs (Hecht et al., 2001; Albrecht et al., 2005; Kwaaitaal et al., 2005).  [CLS] Ectopic expression of SERK1 does not result in an obvious phenotype in Arabidopsis plants but increases somatic embryo formation [CLS]  in culture (Hecht et al., 2001). SERK1 is a member of a small family of five related RLKs, all of which have five LRRs and a typical Ser-Pro\u2013rich juxtamembrane"]]
["seedev_train_477", [" [CLS] RLK5, and FLS2 genes were shown to function in shoot meristem maintenance, hormone perception, organ elongation,\ndisease resistance, abscission [CLS] , and flagellin signaling, respectively (reviewed in Torii, 2004). Extensive genetic and biochemical studies have been undertaken to identify additional components of different signaling\npathways. For example, negative and positive"]]
["seedev_train_478", [" respectively. Their potential substrates are the nuclear proteins BRASSINAZOLE-RESISTANT1 (BZR1) (Wang et al., 2002b) and bri1-EMS-SUPPRESSOR1 (BES1) (Yin et al., 2002).\nWe previously identified Arabidopsis SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1 ( [CLS] SERK1), an LRR-RLK that marks the formation of embryogenic cells [CLS]  in culture\nand is expressed in ovule primordia and in both male and female gametophytes. In sporophytic tissues, SERK1 has a complex\nexpression pattern, with expression being highest in"]]
["seedev_train_479", [" yeast two-hybrid screen, two additional SERK1-interacting proteins, CDC48A and 14-3-3\u03bb, were found (Rienties et\nal., 2005). These interactions suggested analogy with the mammalian CDC48 homologue p97/VCP complex, in which  [CLS] p97/VCP can be phosphorylated\nby the JAK-2 kinase and dephosphorylated by the phosphatase PTPH1 [CLS]  that associates with a 14-3-3 protein (Zhang et al., 1997, 1999). KAPP has also been reported to interact with other LRR-RLKs such as HAESA, WALL-ASSOCIATED KINASE1, FLS2, and CLV1"]]
["seedev_train_480", [" [CLS] CLV1), BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE1 (BRI1), ERECTA, rice (Oryza sativa) Xa21, HAESA-RLK5, and FLS2 genes were shown to function in shoot meristem maintenance [CLS] , hormone perception, organ elongation,\ndisease resistance, abscission, and flagellin signaling, respectively (reviewed in Torii, 2004). Extensive genetic and biochemical studies have been undertaken to identify additional components of different"]]
["seedev_train_481", [" [CLS] ERECTA, rice (Oryza sativa) Xa21, HAESA-RLK5, and FLS2 genes were shown to function in shoot meristem maintenance, hormone perception, organ elongation [CLS] ,\ndisease resistance, abscission, and flagellin signaling, respectively (reviewed in Torii, 2004). Extensive genetic and biochemical studies have been undertaken to identify additional components of different signaling\npathways. For example,"]]
["seedev_train_482", [" BR receptor complex and is proposed to function as a coreceptor\nof the BRI1 protein (Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002). Recently, we showed that in living  [CLS] plant cells BRI1 [CLS]  and SERK3 interaction occurred in restricted areas of the membrane\nand recycled upon internalization by endocytosis (Russinova et al., 2004).\nSERK1 was shown to interact with the KINASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN", " [CLS] Arabidopsis thaliana CLAVATA1 (CLV1), BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE1 (BRI1 [CLS] ), ERECTA, rice (Oryza sativa) Xa21, HAESA-RLK5, and FLS2 genes were shown to function in shoot meristem maintenance, hormone perception, organ elongation,\ndisease resistance, abscission, and flagellin signaling, respectively (reviewed"]]
["seedev_train_483", [" BR receptor complex and is proposed to function as a coreceptor\nof the BRI1 protein (Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002). Recently, we showed that in living  [CLS] plant cells BRI1 and SERK3 [CLS]  interaction occurred in restricted areas of the membrane\nand recycled upon internalization by endocytosis (Russinova et al., 2004).\nSERK1 was shown to interact with the KINASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE (KAPP)"]]
["seedev_train_484", [" complex and is proposed to function as a coreceptor\nof the BRI1 protein (Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002). Recently, we showed that in living plant cells  [CLS] BRI1 and SERK3 interaction occurred in restricted areas of the membrane [CLS] \nand recycled upon internalization by endocytosis (Russinova et al., 2004).\nSERK1 was shown to interact with the KINASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE (KAPP) that is postulated to play a role in", " only a small fraction\nof the complexes we isolated are actively signaling via the SERK1 protein. This notion seems to be supported by the fact that\nmost of the  [CLS] BRI1 receptors were unassociated with SERK1 in seedlings [CLS] . Although our results do not allow us to precisely predict\nthe composition, it is likely that SERK1, SERK3, and BRI1 receptors can form tetrameric complexes analogous to the functional", " SERK1 is a previously unrecognized element of BR signaling.\nRecently, we showed that the SERK3 receptor may have a role in the internalization of BRI1 after heterodimerization and that\n [CLS] BRI1 can also form homodimers in the plasma membrane [CLS]  (Russinova et al., 2004). Further biochemical evidence comes from the finding here that BRI1 and SERK1 as well as SERK1 and SERK3 can interact in\nthe plasma membrane of", " complex. This finding implies that SERK1 is a previously unrecognized element of BR signaling.\nRecently, we showed that the SERK3 receptor may have a role in the internalization of  [CLS] BRI1 after heterodimerization and that\nBRI1 can also form homodimers in the plasma membrane [CLS]  (Russinova et al., 2004). Further biochemical evidence comes from the finding here that BRI1 and SERK1 as well as SERK1 and SERK3 can interact in\nthe plasma membrane of", " internalization of BRI1 after heterodimerization and that\nBRI1 can also form homodimers in the plasma membrane (Russinova et al., 2004). Further biochemical evidence comes from the finding here that  [CLS] BRI1 and SERK1 as well as SERK1 and SERK3 can interact in\nthe plasma membrane of protoplasts [CLS] . FRET studies between SERK1-CFP and SERK1-YFP have shown that only 15% of SERK1 exists\nas homodimers on the plasma membrane of protoplast cells (Shah et al., 2001a). Our results"]]
["seedev_train_485", [" is proposed to function as a coreceptor\nof the BRI1 protein (Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002). Recently, we showed that in living plant cells BRI1 and  [CLS] SERK3 interaction occurred in restricted areas of the membrane [CLS] \nand recycled upon internalization by endocytosis (Russinova et al., 2004).\nSERK1 was shown to interact with the KINASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE (KAPP) that is postulated to play a role in"]]
["seedev_train_486", [" high sensitivity by specific proteolytic digestion and determination of\nthe peptide masses by mass spectrometry. This technique has been used for a systematic study of multiprotein complexes. For\nthe  [CLS] epidermal growth factor receptor, a human [CLS]  receptor Tyr kinase, immunoprecipitation combined with matrix-assisted laser\ndesorption ionization\u2013time of flight/mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF/MS) was used to identify components of the epidermal growth\nfactor receptor signaling complex (Pandey et"]]
["seedev_train_487", [" digestion and determination of\nthe peptide masses by mass spectrometry. This technique has been used for a systematic study of multiprotein complexes. For\nthe epidermal growth factor receptor, a  [CLS] human receptor Tyr kinase [CLS] , immunoprecipitation combined with matrix-assisted laser\ndesorption ionization\u2013time of flight/mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF/MS) was used to identify components of the epidermal growth\nfactor receptor signaling complex (Pandey et al., 2000). For"]]
["seedev_train_488", [" [CLS] rice (Oryza sativa) Xa21, HAESA-RLK5, and FLS2 [CLS]  genes were shown to function in shoot meristem maintenance, hormone perception, organ elongation,\ndisease resistance, abscission, and flagellin signaling, respectively (reviewed in Torii, 2004). Extensive genetic and biochemical studies"]]
["seedev_train_489", [" [CLS] rice (Oryza sativa) Xa21 [CLS] , HAESA-RLK5, and FLS2 genes were shown to function in shoot meristem maintenance, hormone perception, organ elongation,\ndisease resistance, abscission, and flagellin signaling, respectively (reviewed in Torii, 2004). Extensive genetic"]]
["seedev_train_490", [" [CLS] rice (Oryza sativa) Xa21, HAESA-RLK5 [CLS] , and FLS2 genes were shown to function in shoot meristem maintenance, hormone perception, organ elongation,\ndisease resistance, abscission, and flagellin signaling, respectively (reviewed in Torii, 2004). Extensive genetic and"]]
["seedev_train_491", [" [CLS] Arabidopsis thaliana CLAVATA1 (CLV1 [CLS] ), BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE1 (BRI1), ERECTA, rice (Oryza sativa) Xa21, HAESA-RLK5, and FLS2 genes were shown to function in shoot meristem maintenance, hormone perception, organ elongation,\ndisease resistance, abscission, and flagellin signaling,"]]
["seedev_train_492", [" [CLS] Arabidopsis thaliana CLAVATA1 (CLV1), BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE1 (BRI1), ERECTA [CLS] , rice (Oryza sativa) Xa21, HAESA-RLK5, and FLS2 genes were shown to function in shoot meristem maintenance, hormone perception, organ elongation,\ndisease resistance, abscission, and flagellin signaling, respectively (reviewed in"]]
["seedev_train_493", [" BR receptor complex and is proposed to function as a coreceptor\nof the BRI1 protein (Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002). Recently, we showed that in living  [CLS] plant cells BRI1 and SERK3 interaction occurred in restricted areas of the membrane\nand recycled upon internalization by endocytosis [CLS]  (Russinova et al., 2004).\nSERK1 was shown to interact with the KINASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE (KAPP) that is postulated to play a role in receptor\ninternalization (Shah et al., 2002)."]]
["seedev_train_494", [" receptor complex and is proposed to function as a coreceptor\nof the BRI1 protein (Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002). Recently, we showed that in living plant  [CLS] cells BRI1 and SERK3 interaction occurred in restricted areas of the membrane\nand recycled upon internalization by endocytosis [CLS]  (Russinova et al., 2004).\nSERK1 was shown to interact with the KINASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE (KAPP) that is postulated to play a role in receptor\ninternalization (Shah et al., 2002)."]]
["seedev_train_495", [" BR receptor complex and is proposed to function as a coreceptor\nof the BRI1 protein (Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002). Recently, we showed that in living  [CLS] plant cells BRI1 [CLS]  and SERK3 interaction occurred in restricted areas of the membrane\nand recycled upon internalization by endocytosis (Russinova et al., 2004).\nSERK1 was shown to interact with the KINASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN", " BR receptor complex and is proposed to function as a coreceptor\nof the BRI1 protein (Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002). Recently, we showed that in living  [CLS] plant cells BRI1 and SERK3 [CLS]  interaction occurred in restricted areas of the membrane\nand recycled upon internalization by endocytosis (Russinova et al., 2004).\nSERK1 was shown to interact with the KINASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE (KAPP)"]]
["seedev_train_496", [" receptor complex and is proposed to function as a coreceptor\nof the BRI1 protein (Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002). Recently, we showed that in living plant  [CLS] cells BRI1 [CLS]  and SERK3 interaction occurred in restricted areas of the membrane\nand recycled upon internalization by endocytosis (Russinova et al., 2004).\nSERK1 was shown to interact with the KINASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN", " receptor complex and is proposed to function as a coreceptor\nof the BRI1 protein (Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002). Recently, we showed that in living plant  [CLS] cells BRI1 and SERK3 [CLS]  interaction occurred in restricted areas of the membrane\nand recycled upon internalization by endocytosis (Russinova et al., 2004).\nSERK1 was shown to interact with the KINASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE (KAPP)"]]
["seedev_train_497", [" family (Mora-Garcia et al., 2004), respectively. Their potential substrates are the nuclear proteins BRASSINAZOLE-RESISTANT1 (BZR1) (Wang et al., 2002b) and bri1-EMS-SUPPRESSOR1 (BES1) (Yin et al., 2002).\nWe previously identified  [CLS] Arabidopsis SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1 (SERK1 [CLS] ), an LRR-RLK that marks the formation of embryogenic cells in culture\nand is expressed in ovule primordia and in both male and female gametophytes. In sporophytic tissues, SERK1 has"]]
["seedev_train_498", [" [CLS] rice (Oryza sativa) Xa21, HAESA-RLK5, and FLS2 genes were shown to function in shoot meristem maintenance, hormone perception, organ elongation,\ndisease resistance, abscission, and flagellin signaling [CLS] , respectively (reviewed in Torii, 2004). Extensive genetic and biochemical studies have been undertaken to identify additional components of different signaling\npathways. For example, negative and positive regulators of brassinosteroid", " [CLS] rice (Oryza sativa) Xa21, HAESA-RLK5, and FLS2 genes were shown to function in shoot meristem maintenance, hormone perception, organ elongation,\ndisease resistance [CLS] , abscission, and flagellin signaling, respectively (reviewed in Torii, 2004). Extensive genetic and biochemical studies have been undertaken to identify additional components of different signaling\npathways. For example, negative and", " [CLS] rice (Oryza sativa) Xa21, HAESA-RLK5, and FLS2 genes were shown to function in shoot meristem maintenance, hormone perception, organ elongation,\ndisease resistance, abscission [CLS] , and flagellin signaling, respectively (reviewed in Torii, 2004). Extensive genetic and biochemical studies have been undertaken to identify additional components of different signaling\npathways. For example, negative and positive"]]
["seedev_train_499", [" proteins can also promote the cytoplasmic localization or, conversely, the nuclear\nlocalization, of transcription factors (reviewed in Muslin and Xing, 2000). One of the other MADS box transcription factors,  [CLS] AGL24, was shown to interact directly with the kinase domain of the Arabidopsis meristematic receptor-like kinase [CLS]  and to be phosphorylated by the kinase domain of the receptor in vitro (Fujita et al.,\n2003). AGL15 was shown to accumulate in nuclei but also to be present"]]
["seedev_train_500", [" bind directly to the promoter regions of different targets (Wang et al., 2002a). Those authors described how after chromatin immunoprecipitation, they obtained DNA fragments containing cis-regulatory elements targeted by  [CLS] AGL15, which may contribute to the regulation of the SERK gene by directly binding to its promoter [CLS] . These data and our findings suggest that SERK1 and AGL15 can be involved in the\nsame signaling pathway.\nThe other putative transcription factor found in the SERK1 complex belongs", " AGL15 and AGL18 (Adamczyk et\u00a0al., 2007), it is possible that any increase in expression is masked by a subsequent autorepression or higher levels of redundancy involving other MADS-domain proteins.\n [CLS] AGL15 binds the promoter of LEA76 [CLS]  and represses its transcription. There is an increase in LEA76 transcript accumulation in agl15 plants, and, conversely, a decrease in response to increased AGL15 levels in all tissues tested.", " regulation of MADS-box genes in plants (G\u00f3mez-Mena et\u00a0al., 2005; Honma and Goto, 2000; Zhu and Perry, 2005). We previously reported that AGL15 represses AGL15 transcription (Zhu and Perry, 2005).  [CLS] AGL15 can also directly associate with regulatory regions of AGL18 [CLS]  and repress accumulation of AGL18 transcript (Figure 5a,b). No noticeable increase in AGL18 transcription has been observed in plants homozygous for null alleles of AGL15 (Figure 5b) or vice"]]
["seedev_train_501", [" only a small fraction\nof the complexes we isolated are actively signaling via the SERK1 protein. This notion seems to be supported by the fact that\nmost of the  [CLS] BRI1 receptors were unassociated with SERK1 [CLS]  in seedlings. Although our results do not allow us to precisely predict\nthe composition, it is likely that SERK1, SERK3, and BRI1 receptors can form tetrameric complexes analogous to", " complex. This finding implies that SERK1 is a previously unrecognized element of BR signaling.\nRecently, we showed that the SERK3 receptor may have a role in the internalization of  [CLS] BRI1 after heterodimerization and that\nBRI1 [CLS]  can also form homodimers in the plasma membrane (Russinova et al., 2004). Further biochemical evidence comes from the finding here that BRI1 and SERK1 as well as SERK1 and"]]
["seedev_train_502", [" 14-3-3\u03bd in seedlings and perhaps with\n14-3-3\u03bb in siliques, given the origin of the Arabidopsis cDNA library from young silique tissue that was used for yeast two-hybrid screening. The  [CLS] kinase domain of SERK1 is able to\ntransphosphorylate and bind in vitro to CDC48A, 14-3-3\u03bb, and KAPP [CLS]  (Rienties et al., 2005). In vitro, the interactions are all phosphorylation-dependent. In vivo, it was shown that SERK1 interacts with KAPP only\nin intracellular vesicles, and it was proposed", " 14-3-3\u03bd in seedlings and perhaps with\n14-3-3\u03bb in siliques, given the origin of the Arabidopsis cDNA library from young silique tissue that was used for yeast two-hybrid screening. The  [CLS] kinase domain of SERK1 is able to\ntransphosphorylate and bind in vitro to CDC48A [CLS] , 14-3-3\u03bb, and KAPP (Rienties et al., 2005). In vitro, the interactions are all phosphorylation-dependent. In vivo, it was shown that SERK1 interacts with KAPP only\nin intracellular vesicles, and", " 14-3-3\u03bd in seedlings and perhaps with\n14-3-3\u03bb in siliques, given the origin of the Arabidopsis cDNA library from young silique tissue that was used for yeast two-hybrid screening. The  [CLS] kinase domain of SERK1 is able to\ntransphosphorylate and bind in vitro to CDC48A, 14-3-3\u03bb [CLS] , and KAPP (Rienties et al., 2005). In vitro, the interactions are all phosphorylation-dependent. In vivo, it was shown that SERK1 interacts with KAPP only\nin intracellular vesicles, and it"]]
["seedev_train_503", [" complexes\nis the localization of SERK1 in the plasma membrane as well as in internalized membrane compartments (Russinova et al., 2004; Kwaaitaal et al., 2005).\nIt was proposed that  [CLS] BRI1 forms heterodimers with SERK3 [CLS]  to initiate BR signaling upon BR binding (Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002). This was recently confirmed in an elegant demonstration of the in vivo phosphorylation properties", " 2002; Nam and Li, 2002), as components of the SERK1 complex. This finding implies that SERK1 is a previously unrecognized element of BR signaling.\nRecently, we showed that the  [CLS] SERK3 receptor may have a role in the internalization of BRI1 [CLS]  after heterodimerization and that\nBRI1 can also form homodimers in the plasma membrane (Russinova et al., 2004). Further biochemical evidence comes from the finding here that BRI1 and SERK1", " SERK1-YFP have shown that only 15% of SERK1 exists\nas homodimers on the plasma membrane of protoplast cells (Shah et al., 2001a). Our results showed that both SERK1 and  [CLS] SERK3 heterodimerize with the BRI1 [CLS]  receptor, suggesting that both coreceptors can\nhave comparable activity in terms of BRI1 signaling and/or internalization. Another piece of evidence is that a bak1 null allele shows less severe"]]
["seedev_train_504", ["\nthe composition, it is likely that SERK1, SERK3, and BRI1 receptors can form tetrameric complexes analogous to the functional\ncomplex of transforming growth factor-\u00df (TGF-\u00df) receptors. Each type of  [CLS] TGF-\u00df [CLS]  receptor is also present as a ligand-independent\ndimer on the cell surface. TGF-\u00df binding to the T\u00dfRII homodimers promotes the formation of (T\u00dfRI)2/(T\u00dfRII)2 heterodimers, in which T\u00dfRI is phosphorylated", " tetrameric complexes analogous to the functional\ncomplex of transforming growth factor-\u00df (TGF-\u00df) receptors. Each type of TGF-\u00df receptor is also present as a ligand-independent\ndimer on the cell surface.  [CLS] TGF-\u00df binding to the T\u00dfRII [CLS]  homodimers promotes the formation of (T\u00dfRI)2/(T\u00dfRII)2 heterodimers, in which T\u00dfRI is phosphorylated by the constitutively active T\u00dfRII and becomes activated to propagate the TGF-\u00df\nsignal. Combinatorial interactions in the"]]
["seedev_train_505", [" the functional\ncomplex of transforming growth factor-\u00df (TGF-\u00df) receptors. Each type of TGF-\u00df receptor is also present as a ligand-independent\ndimer on the cell surface. TGF-\u00df binding to the  [CLS] T\u00dfRII [CLS]  homodimers promotes the formation of (T\u00dfRI)2/(T\u00dfRII)2 heterodimers, in which T\u00dfRI is phosphorylated by the constitutively active T\u00dfRII and becomes activated to propagate the TGF-\u00df\nsignal. Combinatorial interactions in the"]]
["seedev_train_506", [" BRI1 and SERK1 as well as SERK1 and SERK3 can interact in\nthe plasma membrane of protoplasts. FRET studies between SERK1-CFP and SERK1-YFP have shown that only 15% of  [CLS] SERK1 [CLS]  exists\nas homodimers on the plasma membrane of protoplast cells (Shah et al., 2001a). Our results showed that both SERK1 and SERK3 heterodimerize with the BRI1 receptor, suggesting that", " SERK1-CFP and SERK1-YFP have shown that only 15% of SERK1 exists\nas homodimers on the plasma membrane of protoplast cells (Shah et al., 2001a). Our results showed that both  [CLS] SERK1 and SERK3 heterodimerize with the BRI1 [CLS]  receptor, suggesting that both coreceptors can\nhave comparable activity in terms of BRI1 signaling and/or internalization. Another piece of evidence is that a bak1 null allele shows less severe"]]
["seedev_train_507", [" hexameric forms (Rancour et al., 2002). In Arabidopsis suspension-cultured cells, soluble (cytosolic) CDC48A was found in a high molecular mass protein of 640 kD. Recently, it\nwas proposed that  [CLS] CDC48A interacts with PUX1 [CLS]  as a monomer and may function in regulating plant growth (Rancour et al., 2004) and also in the plant endoplasmic reticulum\u2013associated protein degradation system (Muller et al., 2005).\nPlant"]]
["seedev_train_508", [" (Gomez-Gomez et al., 2001), it has been shown that KAPP functions as a negative regulator, and it may have the same role in controlling signaling through\nthe SERK1 receptor.\n [CLS] CDC48 [CLS]  protein assembles mainly in hexameric forms (Rancour et al., 2002). In Arabidopsis suspension-cultured cells, soluble (cytosolic) CDC48A was found in a high molecular mass protein of 640 kD. Recently,"]]
["seedev_train_509", [" BR Signaling\nA highly interesting finding was the identification of two members of the BR signaling pathway, the main BR receptor BRI1\n(Li and Chory, 1997) and its coreceptor  [CLS] BAK1 (SERK3) (Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002), as components of the SERK1 complex [CLS] . This finding implies that SERK1 is a previously unrecognized element of BR signaling.\nRecently, we showed that the SERK3 receptor may have a role in the internalization of BRI1"]]
["seedev_train_510", [" to its promoter. These data and our findings suggest that SERK1 and AGL15 can be involved in the\nsame signaling pathway.\nThe other putative transcription factor found in the  [CLS] SERK1 complex belongs to a large family of CO-like zinc finger transcription\nfactors [CLS] , in which the zinc finger region regulates protein\u2013protein interactions, as found for several animal transcription\nfactors (reviewed in Griffiths et al., 2003). Recently, it was shown that CO accumulation"]]
["seedev_train_511", [" and current models propose that the interaction with members of the 14-3-3 family is client-driven (Paul et al., 2005).\nTwo transcription factors were found to be associated with the  [CLS] SERK1 complex: AGL15 and a putative CO-like [CLS]  B-box zinc finger\nprotein. Most likely, these two proteins do not interact directly with the receptor but require 14-3-3 proteins as adaptor\nproteins. It has been shown that 14-3-3"]]
["seedev_train_512", [" 1997). This so-called tetrameric model was also recently proposed for BRI1 and BAK1 (SERK3) (Wang et al., 2005b).\nOther SERK1 Complex Components\nThe presence of the PP2C phosphatase KAPP,  [CLS] 14-3-3\u03bd, and CDC48A in the SERK1 complex confirms previously obtained results using\nyeast two-hybrid screening and in vitro interaction\nstudies (Rienties et al., 2005). Collectively, these proteins appear to be involved in dephosphorylation, protein interaction [CLS]  and membrane interaction,\nand protein degradation, respectively. It is likely that they represent receptor maintenance or trafficking functions. Previously,\nit was shown that SERK1 could interact with 14-3-3\u03bb (Rienties"]]
["seedev_train_513", [" and current models propose that the interaction with members of the 14-3-3 family is client-driven (Paul et al., 2005).\nTwo transcription factors were found to be associated with the  [CLS] SERK1 complex: AGL15 [CLS]  and a putative CO-like B-box zinc finger\nprotein. Most likely, these two proteins do not interact directly with the receptor but require 14-3-3 proteins as adaptor\nproteins. It has"]]
["seedev_train_514", [" that SERK1\u2013BRI1 interactions indeed affect BRI1-mediated signaling in planta, but to a lesser extent\nthan SERK3\u2013BRI1 interactions. Notably, none of the proposed downstream components of BRI1, such as BES1,  [CLS] BZR1, or BIN2 (Li\nand Nam, 2002; Wang et al., 2002b; Yin et al., 2002), was detected in the SERK1 complex [CLS] .\nIt is unlikely that all proteins (as identified by MALDI-TOF/MS) listed in Table 1 are present in a complex together with SERK1 at the same time. Especially because proteins"]]
["seedev_train_515", [" conversely, the nuclear\nlocalization, of transcription factors (reviewed in Muslin and Xing, 2000). One of the other MADS box transcription factors, AGL24, was shown to interact directly with the  [CLS] kinase domain of the Arabidopsis meristematic receptor-like kinase [CLS]  and to be phosphorylated by the kinase domain of the receptor in vitro (Fujita et al.,\n2003). AGL15 was shown to accumulate in nuclei but also to be present"]]
["seedev_train_516", [" SERK1-CFP and SERK1-YFP have shown that only 15% of SERK1 exists\nas homodimers on the plasma membrane of protoplast cells (Shah et al., 2001a). Our results showed that both  [CLS] SERK1 and SERK3 heterodimerize with the BRI1 receptor, suggesting that both coreceptors can\nhave comparable activity in terms of BRI1 signaling [CLS]  and/or internalization. Another piece of evidence is that a bak1 null allele shows less severe phenotypes than bri1 loss-of-function alleles, indicating that partially redundant activity could be attributed to"]]
["seedev_train_517", [" Derynck, 1997). This so-called tetrameric model was also recently proposed for BRI1 and BAK1 (SERK3) (Wang et al., 2005b).\nOther SERK1 Complex Components\nThe presence of the PP2C phosphatase  [CLS] KAPP, 14-3-3\u03bd, and CDC48A in the SERK1 complex confirms previously obtained results using\nyeast two-hybrid screening and in vitro interaction\nstudies (Rienties et al., 2005). Collectively, these proteins appear to be involved in dephosphorylation [CLS] , protein interaction and membrane interaction,\nand protein degradation, respectively. It is likely that they represent receptor maintenance or trafficking functions. Previously,\nit was shown that SERK1 could interact with"]]
["seedev_train_518", [" SERK1-YFP have shown that only 15% of SERK1 exists\nas homodimers on the plasma membrane of protoplast cells (Shah et al., 2001a). Our results showed that both SERK1 and  [CLS] SERK3 heterodimerize with the BRI1 receptor, suggesting that both coreceptors can\nhave comparable activity in terms of BRI1 signaling and/or internalization [CLS] . Another piece of evidence is that a bak1 null allele shows less severe phenotypes than bri1 loss-of-function alleles, indicating that partially redundant activity could be attributed to different SERK"]]
["seedev_train_519", [" it may have the same role in controlling signaling through\nthe SERK1 receptor.\nCDC48 protein assembles mainly in hexameric forms (Rancour et al., 2002). In Arabidopsis suspension-cultured cells, soluble ( [CLS] cytosolic) CDC48A [CLS]  was found in a high molecular mass protein of 640 kD. Recently, it\nwas proposed that CDC48A interacts with PUX1 as a monomer and may function in regulating plant"]]
["seedev_train_520", [" interactions indeed affect BRI1-mediated signaling in planta, but to a lesser extent\nthan SERK3\u2013BRI1 interactions. Notably, none of the proposed downstream components of BRI1, such as BES1, BZR1, or  [CLS] BIN2 (Li\nand Nam, 2002; Wang et al., 2002b; Yin et al., 2002), was detected in the SERK1 complex [CLS] .\nIt is unlikely that all proteins (as identified by MALDI-TOF/MS) listed in Table 1 are present in a complex together with SERK1 at the same time. Especially because proteins"]]
["seedev_train_521", [" so-called tetrameric model was also recently proposed for BRI1 and BAK1 (SERK3) (Wang et al., 2005b).\nOther SERK1 Complex Components\nThe presence of the PP2C phosphatase KAPP, 14-3-3\u03bd, and  [CLS] CDC48A in the SERK1 complex [CLS]  confirms previously obtained results using\nyeast two-hybrid screening and in vitro interaction\nstudies (Rienties et al., 2005). Collectively, these proteins appear to be involved in dephosphorylation, protein interaction and"]]
["seedev_train_522", [" SERK1-CFP and SERK1-YFP have shown that only 15% of SERK1 exists\nas homodimers on the plasma membrane of protoplast cells (Shah et al., 2001a). Our results showed that both  [CLS] SERK1 and SERK3 heterodimerize with the BRI1 receptor, suggesting that both coreceptors can\nhave comparable activity in terms of BRI1 signaling and/or internalization [CLS] . Another piece of evidence is that a bak1 null allele shows less severe phenotypes than bri1 loss-of-function alleles, indicating that partially redundant activity could be attributed to different SERK", " was also recently proposed for BRI1 and BAK1 (SERK3) (Wang et al., 2005b).\nOther SERK1 Complex Components\nThe presence of the PP2C phosphatase KAPP, 14-3-3\u03bd, and CDC48A in the  [CLS] SERK1 complex confirms previously obtained results using\nyeast two-hybrid screening and in vitro interaction\nstudies (Rienties et al., 2005). Collectively, these proteins appear to be involved in dephosphorylation, protein interaction and membrane interaction,\nand protein degradation [CLS] , respectively. It is likely that they represent receptor maintenance or trafficking functions. Previously,\nit was shown that SERK1 could interact with 14-3-3\u03bb (Rienties et al., 2005). The results presented"]]
["seedev_train_523", [" so-called tetrameric model was also recently proposed for BRI1 and BAK1 (SERK3) (Wang et al., 2005b).\nOther SERK1 Complex Components\nThe presence of the PP2C phosphatase KAPP, 14-3-3\u03bd, and  [CLS] CDC48A in the SERK1 complex confirms previously obtained results using\nyeast two-hybrid screening and in vitro interaction\nstudies (Rienties et al., 2005). Collectively, these proteins appear to be involved in dephosphorylation, protein interaction and membrane interaction [CLS] ,\nand protein degradation, respectively. It is likely that they represent receptor maintenance or trafficking functions. Previously,\nit was shown that SERK1 could interact with 14-3-3\u03bb (Rienties et al., 2005)."]]
["seedev_train_524", [" suggests that SERK1\u2013BRI1 interactions indeed affect BRI1-mediated signaling in planta, but to a lesser extent\nthan SERK3\u2013BRI1 interactions. Notably, none of the proposed downstream components of BRI1, such as  [CLS] BES1, BZR1, or BIN2 (Li\nand Nam, 2002; Wang et al., 2002b; Yin et al., 2002), was detected in the SERK1 complex [CLS] .\nIt is unlikely that all proteins (as identified by MALDI-TOF/MS) listed in Table 1 are present in a complex together with SERK1 at the same time. Especially because proteins"]]
["seedev_train_525", [" 14-3-3\u03bd in seedlings and perhaps with\n14-3-3\u03bb in siliques, given the origin of the Arabidopsis cDNA library from young silique tissue that was used for yeast two-hybrid screening. The  [CLS] kinase domain of SERK1 [CLS]  is able to\ntransphosphorylate and bind in vitro to CDC48A, 14-3-3\u03bb, and KAPP (Rienties et al., 2005). In vitro, the interactions are all phosphorylation-dependent. In vivo, it was shown"]]
["seedev_train_526", [" 1997). This so-called tetrameric model was also recently proposed for BRI1 and BAK1 (SERK3) (Wang et al., 2005b).\nOther SERK1 Complex Components\nThe presence of the PP2C phosphatase KAPP,  [CLS] 14-3-3\u03bd, and CDC48A in the SERK1 complex [CLS]  confirms previously obtained results using\nyeast two-hybrid screening and in vitro interaction\nstudies (Rienties et al., 2005). Collectively, these proteins appear to be involved in dephosphorylation, protein interaction and"]]
["seedev_train_527", [" Derynck, 1997). This so-called tetrameric model was also recently proposed for BRI1 and BAK1 (SERK3) (Wang et al., 2005b).\nOther SERK1 Complex Components\nThe presence of the PP2C phosphatase  [CLS] KAPP, 14-3-3\u03bd, and CDC48A in the SERK1 complex [CLS]  confirms previously obtained results using\nyeast two-hybrid screening and in vitro interaction\nstudies (Rienties et al., 2005). Collectively, these proteins appear to be involved in dephosphorylation, protein interaction and"]]
["seedev_train_528", [" as a monomer and may function in regulating plant growth (Rancour et al., 2004) and also in the plant endoplasmic reticulum\u2013associated protein degradation system (Muller et al., 2005).\nPlant  [CLS] 14-3-3 proteins have also been found associated with G-box transcription factors [CLS]  (Lu et al., 1992). Five Arabidopsis 14-3-3s, including 14-3-3\u03bb, have been shown to interact with other transcription factors (Pan et al., 1999), and current models propose that the interaction"]]
["seedev_train_529", [" an elegant demonstration of the in vivo phosphorylation properties of the BRI1 receptor\n(Wang et al., 2005a). In that work, it was clearly shown that the interaction between the  [CLS] BAK1 (SERK3) proteins and BRI1 [CLS]  is brassinolide-dependent.\nBecause we did not apply exogenous ligands before isolation of the SERK1 complex, it is likely that only a small fraction\nof the complexes we isolated are"]]
["seedev_train_530", [" the receptor in vitro (Fujita et al.,\n2003). AGL15 was shown to accumulate in nuclei but also to be present in the cytoplasm (Perry et al., 1996). SERK1 and  [CLS] AGL15 are highly expressed during embryogenic cell formation [CLS]  in culture and during early embryogenesis. As found\nfor SERK1 (Hecht et al., 2001), AGL15 promotes somatic embryo production from the shoot apical meristem in liquid culture when ectopically", " domain of the receptor in vitro (Fujita et al.,\n2003). AGL15 was shown to accumulate in nuclei but also to be present in the cytoplasm (Perry et al., 1996).  [CLS] SERK1 and AGL15 are highly expressed during embryogenic cell formation [CLS]  in culture and during early embryogenesis. As found\nfor SERK1 (Hecht et al., 2001), AGL15 promotes somatic embryo production from the shoot apical meristem in liquid culture when ectopically"]]
["seedev_train_531", [" domain of the receptor in vitro (Fujita et al.,\n2003). AGL15 was shown to accumulate in nuclei but also to be present in the cytoplasm (Perry et al., 1996).  [CLS] SERK1 and AGL15 are highly expressed during embryogenic cell formation in culture and during early embryogenesis [CLS] . As found\nfor SERK1 (Hecht et al., 2001), AGL15 promotes somatic embryo production from the shoot apical meristem in liquid culture when ectopically overexpressed\n(Perry et al., 1996; Harding", " the receptor in vitro (Fujita et al.,\n2003). AGL15 was shown to accumulate in nuclei but also to be present in the cytoplasm (Perry et al., 1996). SERK1 and  [CLS] AGL15 are highly expressed during embryogenic cell formation in culture and during early embryogenesis [CLS] . As found\nfor SERK1 (Hecht et al., 2001), AGL15 promotes somatic embryo production from the shoot apical meristem in liquid culture when ectopically overexpressed\n(Perry et al., 1996; Harding"]]
["seedev_train_532", [" interact directly with the kinase domain of the Arabidopsis meristematic receptor-like kinase and to be phosphorylated by the kinase domain of the receptor in vitro (Fujita et al.,\n2003).  [CLS] AGL15 was shown to accumulate in nuclei [CLS]  but also to be present in the cytoplasm (Perry et al., 1996). SERK1 and AGL15 are highly expressed during embryogenic cell formation in culture and during early embryogenesis. As"]]
["seedev_train_533", [" (Hecht et al., 2001), AGL15 promotes somatic embryo production from the shoot apical meristem in liquid culture when ectopically overexpressed\n(Perry et al., 1996; Harding et al., 2003). Interestingly,  [CLS] AGL15-overexpressing tissues also had increased expression of SERK1 [CLS]  (Harding et al., 2003). It was shown that AGL15 could bind directly to the promoter regions of different targets (Wang et al., 2002a). Those authors described how after chromatin"]]
["seedev_train_534", [" results do not allow us to precisely predict\nthe composition, it is likely that SERK1, SERK3, and BRI1 receptors can form tetrameric complexes analogous to the functional\ncomplex of  [CLS] transforming growth factor-\u00df (TGF-\u00df) receptors [CLS] . Each type of TGF-\u00df receptor is also present as a ligand-independent\ndimer on the cell surface. TGF-\u00df binding to the T\u00dfRII homodimers promotes the formation of (T\u00dfRI)2/(T\u00dfRII)2 heterodimers, in"]]
["seedev_train_535", [" BR Signaling\nA highly interesting finding was the identification of two members of the BR signaling pathway, the main BR receptor BRI1\n(Li and Chory, 1997) and its coreceptor  [CLS] BAK1 (SERK3 [CLS] ) (Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002), as components of the SERK1 complex. This finding implies that SERK1 is a previously unrecognized element of BR signaling.\nRecently, we"]]
["seedev_train_536", [" partially redundant activity could be attributed to different SERK family members\n(Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002). Genetic analysis of the serk1-1 bri1-119 double mutant suggests that  [CLS] SERK1\u2013BRI1 interactions indeed affect BRI1-mediated signaling in planta, but to a lesser extent\nthan SERK3\u2013BRI1 [CLS]  interactions. Notably, none of the proposed downstream components of BRI1, such as BES1, BZR1, or BIN2 (Li\nand Nam, 2002; Wang et al., 2002b; Yin et al., 2002), was"]]
["seedev_train_537", [" been shown that 14-3-3 proteins can also promote the cytoplasmic localization or, conversely, the nuclear\nlocalization, of transcription factors (reviewed in Muslin and Xing, 2000). One of the other  [CLS] MADS box transcription factors, AGL24 [CLS] , was shown to interact directly with the kinase domain of the Arabidopsis meristematic receptor-like kinase and to be phosphorylated by the kinase domain of the receptor in vitro (Fujita"]]
["seedev_train_538", [" interaction with members of the 14-3-3 family is client-driven (Paul et al., 2005).\nTwo transcription factors were found to be associated with the SERK1 complex: AGL15 and a putative  [CLS] CO-like B-box zinc finger\nprotein [CLS] . Most likely, these two proteins do not interact directly with the receptor but require 14-3-3 proteins as adaptor\nproteins. It has been shown that 14-3-3 proteins can also promote"]]
["seedev_train_539", [" (Feng and Derynck, 1997). This so-called tetrameric model was also recently proposed for BRI1 and BAK1 (SERK3) (Wang et al., 2005b).\nOther SERK1 Complex Components\nThe presence of the  [CLS] PP2C phosphatase KAPP [CLS] , 14-3-3\u03bd, and CDC48A in the SERK1 complex confirms previously obtained results using\nyeast two-hybrid screening and in vitro interaction\nstudies (Rienties et al., 2005). Collectively, these proteins appear to"]]
["seedev_train_540", [" be attributed to different SERK family members\n(Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002). Genetic analysis of the serk1-1 bri1-119 double mutant suggests that SERK1\u2013BRI1 interactions indeed affect  [CLS] BRI1-mediated signaling in planta, but to a lesser extent\nthan SERK3\u2013BRI1 [CLS]  interactions. Notably, none of the proposed downstream components of BRI1, such as BES1, BZR1, or BIN2 (Li\nand Nam, 2002; Wang et al., 2002b; Yin et al., 2002), was"]]
["seedev_train_541", [" able to\ntransphosphorylate and bind in vitro to CDC48A, 14-3-3\u03bb, and KAPP (Rienties et al., 2005). In vitro, the interactions are all phosphorylation-dependent. In vivo, it was shown that  [CLS] SERK1 interacts with KAPP only\nin intracellular vesicles, and it was proposed to play a role in receptor internalization [CLS]  as well as in dephosphorylation\n(Shah et al., 2002). For two other LRR-RLKs, CLV1 (Williams et al., 1997) and FLS2 (Gomez-Gomez et al., 2001), it has been shown that", " able to\ntransphosphorylate and bind in vitro to CDC48A, 14-3-3\u03bb, and KAPP (Rienties et al., 2005). In vitro, the interactions are all phosphorylation-dependent. In vivo, it was shown that  [CLS] SERK1 interacts with KAPP only\nin intracellular vesicles, and it was proposed to play a role in receptor internalization as well as in dephosphorylation [CLS] \n(Shah et al., 2002). For two other LRR-RLKs, CLV1 (Williams et al., 1997) and FLS2 (Gomez-Gomez et al., 2001), it has been shown that KAPP functions as a negative"]]
["seedev_train_542", [" hexameric forms (Rancour et al., 2002). In Arabidopsis suspension-cultured cells, soluble (cytosolic) CDC48A was found in a high molecular mass protein of 640 kD. Recently, it\nwas proposed that  [CLS] CDC48A interacts with PUX1 as a monomer and may function in regulating plant growth [CLS]  (Rancour et al., 2004) and also in the plant endoplasmic reticulum\u2013associated protein degradation system (Muller et al., 2005).\nPlant 14-3-3 proteins have also been found associated with G-box transcription"]]
["seedev_train_543", [" it was proposed to play a role in receptor internalization as well as in dephosphorylation\n(Shah et al., 2002). For two other LRR-RLKs, CLV1 (Williams et al., 1997) and  [CLS] FLS2 (Gomez-Gomez et al., 2001), it has been shown that KAPP [CLS]  functions as a negative regulator, and it may have the same role in controlling signaling through\nthe SERK1 receptor.\nCDC48 protein assembles mainly in hexameric forms (Rancour et al.,", " KAPP only\nin intracellular vesicles, and it was proposed to play a role in receptor internalization as well as in dephosphorylation\n(Shah et al., 2002). For two other LRR-RLKs,  [CLS] CLV1 (Williams et al., 1997) and FLS2 (Gomez-Gomez et al., 2001), it has been shown that KAPP [CLS]  functions as a negative regulator, and it may have the same role in controlling signaling through\nthe SERK1 receptor.\nCDC48 protein assembles mainly in hexameric forms (Rancour et al.,"]]
["seedev_train_544", [" type of TGF-\u00df receptor is also present as a ligand-independent\ndimer on the cell surface. TGF-\u00df binding to the T\u00dfRII homodimers promotes the formation of (T\u00dfRI)2/(T\u00dfRII)2 heterodimers, in which  [CLS] T\u00dfRI is phosphorylated by the constitutively active T\u00dfRII [CLS]  and becomes activated to propagate the TGF-\u00df\nsignal. Combinatorial interactions in the tetrameric receptor complex allow differential ligand binding or differential signaling\nin response to the same ligand. One"]]
["seedev_train_545", [" cytoplasm (Perry et al., 1996). SERK1 and AGL15 are highly expressed during embryogenic cell formation in culture and during early embryogenesis. As found\nfor SERK1 (Hecht et al., 2001),  [CLS] AGL15 promotes somatic embryo production from the shoot apical meristem in liquid culture when ectopically overexpressed [CLS] \n(Perry et al., 1996; Harding et al., 2003). Interestingly, AGL15-overexpressing tissues also had increased expression of SERK1 (Harding et al., 2003). It was shown that AGL15 could bind directly"]]
["seedev_train_546", [" CO-like B-box zinc finger\nprotein. Most likely, these two proteins do not interact directly with the receptor but require 14-3-3 proteins as adaptor\nproteins. It has been shown that  [CLS] 14-3-3 proteins can also promote the cytoplasmic localization or, conversely, the nuclear\nlocalization, of transcription factors [CLS]  (reviewed in Muslin and Xing, 2000). One of the other MADS box transcription factors, AGL24, was shown to interact directly with the kinase domain of the Arabidopsis meristematic receptor-like", " CO-like B-box zinc finger\nprotein. Most likely, these two proteins do not interact directly with the receptor but require 14-3-3 proteins as adaptor\nproteins. It has been shown that  [CLS] 14-3-3 proteins can also promote the cytoplasmic localization or, conversely, the nuclear\nlocalization, of transcription factors [CLS]  (reviewed in Muslin and Xing, 2000). One of the other MADS box transcription factors, AGL24, was shown to interact directly with the kinase domain of the Arabidopsis meristematic receptor-like"]]
["seedev_train_547", [" type of TGF-\u00df receptor is also present as a ligand-independent\ndimer on the cell surface. TGF-\u00df binding to the T\u00dfRII homodimers promotes the formation of (T\u00dfRI)2/(T\u00dfRII)2 heterodimers, in which  [CLS] T\u00dfRI is phosphorylated by the constitutively active T\u00dfRII and becomes activated to propagate the TGF-\u00df\nsignal [CLS] . Combinatorial interactions in the tetrameric receptor complex allow differential ligand binding or differential signaling\nin response to the same ligand. One receptor combination often binds different ligands, and patterns"]]
["seedev_train_548", [" partially redundant activity could be attributed to different SERK family members\n(Li et al., 2002; Nam and Li, 2002). Genetic analysis of the serk1-1 bri1-119 double mutant suggests that  [CLS] SERK1\u2013BRI1 interactions indeed affect BRI1-mediated signaling [CLS]  in planta, but to a lesser extent\nthan SERK3\u2013BRI1 interactions. Notably, none of the proposed downstream components of BRI1, such as BES1, BZR1, or BIN2 (Li\nand Nam, 2002;"]]
["seedev_train_549", [" hexameric forms (Rancour et al., 2002). In Arabidopsis suspension-cultured cells, soluble (cytosolic) CDC48A was found in a high molecular mass protein of 640 kD. Recently, it\nwas proposed that  [CLS] CDC48A interacts with PUX1 as a monomer and may function in regulating plant growth (Rancour et al., 2004) and also in the plant endoplasmic reticulum\u2013associated protein degradation system [CLS]  (Muller et al., 2005).\nPlant 14-3-3 proteins have also been found associated with G-box transcription factors (Lu et al., 1992). Five Arabidopsis 14-3-3s, including 14-3-3\u03bb, have been shown to"]]
["seedev_train_550", [" to be present in the cytoplasm (Perry et al., 1996). SERK1 and AGL15 are highly expressed during embryogenic cell formation in culture and during early embryogenesis. As found\nfor  [CLS] SERK1 (Hecht et al., 2001), AGL15 promotes somatic embryo production from the shoot apical meristem in liquid culture when ectopically overexpressed [CLS] \n(Perry et al., 1996; Harding et al., 2003). Interestingly, AGL15-overexpressing tissues also had increased expression of SERK1 (Harding et al., 2003). It was shown that AGL15 could bind directly"]]
["seedev_train_551", [" bind directly to the promoter regions of different targets (Wang et al., 2002a). Those authors described how after chromatin immunoprecipitation, they obtained DNA fragments containing cis-regulatory elements targeted by  [CLS] AGL15, which may contribute to the regulation of the SERK [CLS]  gene by directly binding to its promoter. These data and our findings suggest that SERK1 and AGL15 can be involved in the\nsame signaling pathway.\nThe other putative transcription", " unaffected by ectopic expression of SAP18 alone, possibly indicating a more specific interaction at these loci. We have demonstrated that AGL15 binds to LEA76 (At1g52690) (Figure 6a), and that  [CLS] LEA76 is repressed by AGL15 [CLS]  and/or SAP18 in a variety of tissues, including seedlings (Figure 5). Published results support a role for SIN3/HDAC1-mediated repression in regulation of LEA76: trichostatin\u00a0A, a specific inhibitor of HDAC,", " AGL15 and AGL18 (Adamczyk et\u00a0al., 2007), it is possible that any increase in expression is masked by a subsequent autorepression or higher levels of redundancy involving other MADS-domain proteins.\n [CLS] AGL15 binds the promoter of LEA76 [CLS]  and represses its transcription. There is an increase in LEA76 transcript accumulation in agl15 plants, and, conversely, a decrease in response to increased AGL15 levels in all tissues tested.", " autoregulatory loops are a common phenomenon in the regulation of MADS-box genes in plants (G\u00f3mez-Mena et\u00a0al., 2005; Honma and Goto, 2000; Zhu and Perry, 2005). We previously reported that  [CLS] AGL15 represses AGL15 [CLS]  transcription (Zhu and Perry, 2005). AGL15 can also directly associate with regulatory regions of AGL18 and repress accumulation of AGL18 transcript (Figure 5a,b). No noticeable increase in AGL18 transcription"]]
["seedev_train_552", [" a negative regulator, and it may have the same role in controlling signaling through\nthe SERK1 receptor.\nCDC48 protein assembles mainly in hexameric forms (Rancour et al., 2002). In  [CLS] Arabidopsis suspension-cultured cells, soluble (cytosolic) CDC48A [CLS]  was found in a high molecular mass protein of 640 kD. Recently, it\nwas proposed that CDC48A interacts with PUX1 as a monomer and may function in regulating plant", " hexameric forms (Rancour et al., 2002). In Arabidopsis suspension-cultured cells, soluble (cytosolic) CDC48A was found in a high molecular mass protein of 640 kD. Recently, it\nwas proposed that  [CLS] CDC48A interacts with PUX1 as a monomer and may function in regulating plant growth (Rancour et al., 2004) and also in the plant [CLS]  endoplasmic reticulum\u2013associated protein degradation system (Muller et al., 2005).\nPlant 14-3-3 proteins have also been found associated with G-box transcription factors (Lu et al., 1992). Five Arabidopsis 14-3-3s, including"]]
["seedev_train_553", [" of transcription factors (reviewed in Muslin and Xing, 2000). One of the other MADS box transcription factors, AGL24, was shown to interact directly with the kinase domain of the  [CLS] Arabidopsis meristematic receptor-like kinase [CLS]  and to be phosphorylated by the kinase domain of the receptor in vitro (Fujita et al.,\n2003). AGL15 was shown to accumulate in nuclei but also to be present"]]
["seedev_train_554", [" conversely, the nuclear\nlocalization, of transcription factors (reviewed in Muslin and Xing, 2000). One of the other MADS box transcription factors, AGL24, was shown to interact directly with the  [CLS] kinase domain of the Arabidopsis [CLS]  meristematic receptor-like kinase and to be phosphorylated by the kinase domain of the receptor in vitro (Fujita et al.,\n2003). AGL15 was shown to accumulate in nuclei but also"]]
["seedev_train_555", [" transcription factors (reviewed in Muslin and Xing, 2000). One of the other MADS box transcription factors, AGL24, was shown to interact directly with the kinase domain of the Arabidopsis  [CLS] meristematic receptor-like kinase [CLS]  and to be phosphorylated by the kinase domain of the receptor in vitro (Fujita et al.,\n2003). AGL15 was shown to accumulate in nuclei but also to be present"]]
["seedev_train_556", [" conversely, the nuclear\nlocalization, of transcription factors (reviewed in Muslin and Xing, 2000). One of the other MADS box transcription factors, AGL24, was shown to interact directly with the  [CLS] kinase domain of the Arabidopsis meristematic [CLS]  receptor-like kinase and to be phosphorylated by the kinase domain of the receptor in vitro (Fujita et al.,\n2003). AGL15 was shown to accumulate in nuclei but also to"]]
["seedev_train_557", ["\nthe composition, it is likely that SERK1, SERK3, and BRI1 receptors can form tetrameric complexes analogous to the functional\ncomplex of transforming growth factor-\u00df (TGF-\u00df) receptors. Each type of  [CLS] TGF-\u00df receptor is also present as a ligand-independent\ndimer on the cell surface [CLS] . TGF-\u00df binding to the T\u00dfRII homodimers promotes the formation of (T\u00dfRI)2/(T\u00dfRII)2 heterodimers, in which T\u00dfRI is phosphorylated by the constitutively active T\u00dfRII and becomes activated to propagate the TGF-\u00df"]]
["seedev_train_558", [" proteins can also promote the cytoplasmic localization or, conversely, the nuclear\nlocalization, of transcription factors (reviewed in Muslin and Xing, 2000). One of the other MADS box transcription factors,  [CLS] AGL24, was shown to interact directly with the kinase domain of the Arabidopsis meristematic receptor-like kinase and to be phosphorylated by the kinase domain of the receptor in vitro [CLS]  (Fujita et al.,\n2003). AGL15 was shown to accumulate in nuclei but also to be present in the cytoplasm (Perry et al., 1996). SERK1 and AGL15 are highly expressed", " factors (reviewed in Muslin and Xing, 2000). One of the other MADS box transcription factors, AGL24, was shown to interact directly with the kinase domain of the Arabidopsis meristematic  [CLS] receptor-like kinase and to be phosphorylated by the kinase domain of the receptor in vitro [CLS]  (Fujita et al.,\n2003). AGL15 was shown to accumulate in nuclei but also to be present in the cytoplasm (Perry et al., 1996). SERK1 and AGL15 are highly expressed", " the origin of the Arabidopsis cDNA library from young silique tissue that was used for yeast two-hybrid screening. The kinase domain of SERK1 is able to\ntransphosphorylate and bind  [CLS] in vitro to CDC48A, 14-3-3\u03bb, and KAPP [CLS]  (Rienties et al., 2005). In vitro, the interactions are all phosphorylation-dependent. In vivo, it was shown that SERK1 interacts with KAPP only\nin intracellular vesicles, and it was proposed", " the origin of the Arabidopsis cDNA library from young silique tissue that was used for yeast two-hybrid screening. The kinase domain of SERK1 is able to\ntransphosphorylate and bind  [CLS] in vitro to CDC48A [CLS] , 14-3-3\u03bb, and KAPP (Rienties et al., 2005). In vitro, the interactions are all phosphorylation-dependent. In vivo, it was shown that SERK1 interacts with KAPP only\nin intracellular vesicles, and", " the origin of the Arabidopsis cDNA library from young silique tissue that was used for yeast two-hybrid screening. The kinase domain of SERK1 is able to\ntransphosphorylate and bind  [CLS] in vitro to CDC48A, 14-3-3\u03bb [CLS] , and KAPP (Rienties et al., 2005). In vitro, the interactions are all phosphorylation-dependent. In vivo, it was shown that SERK1 interacts with KAPP only\nin intracellular vesicles, and it", " precedes and overlaps that of its target genes. Gain- and loss-of-function approaches indicate\na correlation between the amount of bZIP53 protein and MAT gene expression. Specific in vivo and  [CLS] in vitro binding of bZIP53 [CLS] \nprotein to a G-box element in the albumin 2S2 promoter is demonstrated. Importantly, heterodimerization with bZIP10 or bZIP25, previously described bZIP regulators of\nMAT gene expression, significantly enhances DNA"]]
["seedev_train_559", [" 14-3-3\u03bd in seedlings and perhaps with\n14-3-3\u03bb in siliques, given the origin of the Arabidopsis cDNA library from young silique tissue that was used for yeast two-hybrid screening. The  [CLS] kinase domain of SERK1 is able to\ntransphosphorylate and bind in vitro [CLS]  to CDC48A, 14-3-3\u03bb, and KAPP (Rienties et al., 2005). In vitro, the interactions are all phosphorylation-dependent. In vivo, it was shown that SERK1 interacts with KAPP only\nin intracellular"]]
["seedev_train_560", [" et al., 2004). Further biochemical evidence comes from the finding here that BRI1 and SERK1 as well as SERK1 and SERK3 can interact in\nthe plasma membrane of protoplasts.  [CLS] FRET studies between SERK1-CFP and SERK1-YFP have shown that only 15% of SERK1 [CLS]  exists\nas homodimers on the plasma membrane of protoplast cells (Shah et al., 2001a). Our results showed that both SERK1 and SERK3 heterodimerize with the BRI1 receptor, suggesting that"]]
["seedev_train_561", [" PUX1 as a monomer and may function in regulating plant growth (Rancour et al., 2004) and also in the plant endoplasmic reticulum\u2013associated protein degradation system (Muller et al., 2005).\n [CLS] Plant 14-3-3 proteins [CLS]  have also been found associated with G-box transcription factors (Lu et al., 1992). Five Arabidopsis 14-3-3s, including 14-3-3\u03bb, have been shown to interact with other transcription factors (Pan et"]]
["seedev_train_562", [" PUX1 as a monomer and may function in regulating plant growth (Rancour et al., 2004) and also in the plant endoplasmic reticulum\u2013associated protein degradation system (Muller et al., 2005).\n [CLS] Plant 14-3-3 proteins have also been found associated with G-box transcription factors [CLS]  (Lu et al., 1992). Five Arabidopsis 14-3-3s, including 14-3-3\u03bb, have been shown to interact with other transcription factors (Pan et al., 1999), and current models propose that the interaction"]]
["seedev_train_563", [" and bind in vitro to CDC48A, 14-3-3\u03bb, and KAPP (Rienties et al., 2005). In vitro, the interactions are all phosphorylation-dependent. In vivo, it was shown that SERK1 interacts with  [CLS] KAPP only\nin intracellular vesicles [CLS] , and it was proposed to play a role in receptor internalization as well as in dephosphorylation\n(Shah et al., 2002). For two other LRR-RLKs, CLV1 (Williams et al., 1997)"]]
["seedev_train_564", [" maintenance or trafficking functions. Previously,\nit was shown that SERK1 could interact with 14-3-3\u03bb (Rienties et al., 2005). The results presented here suggest that the receptor preferentially interacts with  [CLS] 14-3-3\u03bd in seedlings [CLS]  and perhaps with\n14-3-3\u03bb in siliques, given the origin of the Arabidopsis cDNA library from young silique tissue that was used for yeast two-hybrid screening. The kinase domain of"]]
["seedev_train_565", [" was shown that SERK1 could interact with 14-3-3\u03bb (Rienties et al., 2005). The results presented here suggest that the receptor preferentially interacts with 14-3-3\u03bd in seedlings and perhaps with\n [CLS] 14-3-3\u03bb in siliques [CLS] , given the origin of the Arabidopsis cDNA library from young silique tissue that was used for yeast two-hybrid screening. The kinase domain of SERK1 is able to\ntransphosphorylate and"]]
["seedev_train_566", [" 640 kD. Recently, it\nwas proposed that CDC48A interacts with PUX1 as a monomer and may function in regulating plant growth (Rancour et al., 2004) and also in the  [CLS] plant endoplasmic reticulum\u2013associated protein degradation system [CLS]  (Muller et al., 2005).\nPlant 14-3-3 proteins have also been found associated with G-box transcription factors (Lu et al., 1992). Five Arabidopsis 14-3-3s, including 14-3-3\u03bb, have been shown to"]]
["seedev_train_567", [" 1984). Null abi3 mutant embryos are morphologically almost normal and viable if rescued prior to desiccation (Giraudat et al., 1992; Nambara et al., 1992, 1994). Plants that ectopically express  [CLS] ABI3 or the maize (Zea mays) ortholog VP1 [CLS]  develop normally, but have dramatically altered ABA-dependent gene expression in vegetative tissues (Parcy et al., 1994; Suzuki et al., 2001).\nA major function of the LEC2, FUS3, and ABI3"]]
["seedev_train_568", [" [CLS] LEC1-LIKE (L1L [CLS] ), and B3 domain factors, LEAFY COTYLEDON 2 (LEC2), FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3) of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Interactions of these genes result in temporal progression of", " repression in conjunction with the PKL-related CHD3\nchromatin-remodeling factors.\nEmbryo development in plants is regulated by a network of transcription factors that include the LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1) and  [CLS] LEC1-LIKE (L1L [CLS] ) genes belonging to the HAP3 family CCAAT-binding factors and a subgroup of the plant-specific B3 domain protein family composed\nof the LEC2, FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC ACID (ABA)-INSENSITIVE 3"]]
["seedev_train_569", [" (LEC1) and LEC1-LIKE (L1L) genes belonging to the HAP3 family CCAAT-binding factors and a subgroup of the plant-specific B3 domain protein family composed\nof the LEC2, FUSCA3 (FUS3), and  [CLS] ABSCISIC ACID (ABA)-INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3 [CLS] ) genes (Giraudat et al., 1992; Lotan et al., 1998; Luerssen et al., 1998; Stone et al., 2001; Kwong et al., 2003).\nA series of studies have detailed the complex"]]
["seedev_train_570", [" [CLS] LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1 [CLS] ), LEC1-LIKE (L1L), and B3 domain factors, LEAFY COTYLEDON 2 (LEC2), FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3) of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Interactions of these genes result in temporal", " in the network for chromatin-mediated repression in conjunction with the PKL-related CHD3\nchromatin-remodeling factors.\nEmbryo development in plants is regulated by a network of transcription factors that include the  [CLS] LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1 [CLS] ) and LEC1-LIKE (L1L) genes belonging to the HAP3 family CCAAT-binding factors and a subgroup of the plant-specific B3 domain protein family composed\nof the LEC2, FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC"]]
["seedev_train_571", [" in root and apical meristem regions. In a val1 background, val2 and val3 condition a dominant variegated leaf phenotype revealing a VAL function in vegetative development. Reminiscent of the  [CLS] pickle (pkl [CLS] ) mutant, inhibition of gibberellin biosynthesis during germination induces embryonic phenotypes in val1 seedlings. Consistent with the embryonic seedling phenotype, LEC1, L1L, ABI3, and FUS3 are up-regulated in val1 val2"]]
["seedev_train_572", [" embryo development is regulated by a network of transcription factors that include LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1), LEC1-LIKE (L1L), and B3 domain factors, LEAFY COTYLEDON 2 (LEC2), FUSCA3 (FUS3), and  [CLS] ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3 [CLS] ) of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Interactions of these genes result in temporal progression of overlapping B3 gene expression culminating in maturation\nand desiccation of the seed. Three VP1/ABI3-LIKE (VAL) genes"]]
["seedev_train_573", [" [CLS] FUSCA3 (FUS3 [CLS] ), and ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3) of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Interactions of these genes result in temporal progression of overlapping B3 gene expression culminating in maturation\nand desiccation of", " LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1) and LEC1-LIKE (L1L) genes belonging to the HAP3 family CCAAT-binding factors and a subgroup of the plant-specific B3 domain protein family composed\nof the LEC2,  [CLS] FUSCA3 (FUS3 [CLS] ), and ABSCISIC ACID (ABA)-INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3) genes (Giraudat et al., 1992; Lotan et al., 1998; Luerssen et al., 1998; Stone et al., 2001; Kwong et al., 2003).\nA series"]]
["seedev_train_574", [" CHD3\nchromatin-remodeling factors.\nEmbryo development in plants is regulated by a network of transcription factors that include the LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1) and LEC1-LIKE (L1L) genes belonging to the  [CLS] HAP3 family CCAAT-binding factors [CLS]  and a subgroup of the plant-specific B3 domain protein family composed\nof the LEC2, FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC ACID (ABA)-INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3) genes (Giraudat et al., 1992; Lotan et"]]
["seedev_train_575", [" INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3) of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Interactions of these genes result in temporal progression of overlapping B3 gene expression culminating in maturation\nand desiccation of the seed. Three  [CLS] VP1/ABI3-LIKE (VAL [CLS] ) genes encode B3 proteins that include plant homeodomain-like and CW domains associated with chromatin factors. Whereas val monogenic mutants have phenotypes similar to wild type, val1 val2 double-mutant seedlings"]]
["seedev_train_576", [" (LEC1) and LEC1-LIKE (L1L) genes belonging to the HAP3 family CCAAT-binding factors and a subgroup of the plant-specific B3 domain protein family composed\nof the LEC2, FUSCA3 (FUS3), and  [CLS] ABSCISIC ACID (ABA [CLS] )-INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3) genes (Giraudat et al., 1992; Lotan et al., 1998; Luerssen et al., 1998; Stone et al., 2001; Kwong et al., 2003).\nA series of studies have detailed"]]
["seedev_train_577", [" [CLS] LEAFY COTYLEDON 2 (LEC2 [CLS] ), FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3) of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Interactions of these genes result in temporal progression of overlapping B3 gene expression culminating in maturation\nand"]]
["seedev_train_578", [" [CLS] embryo development is regulated by a network of transcription factors that include LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1), LEC1-LIKE (L1L), and B3 domain factors, LEAFY COTYLEDON 2 (LEC2), FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3 [CLS] ) of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Interactions of these genes result in temporal progression of overlapping B3 gene expression culminating in maturation\nand desiccation of the seed. Three VP1/ABI3-LIKE (VAL) genes", " including the early acting LEC1 and L1L genes. We suggest that VAL targets Sph/RY-containing genes in the network for chromatin-mediated repression in conjunction with the PKL-related CHD3\nchromatin-remodeling factors.\n [CLS] Embryo development in plants is regulated by a network of transcription factors that include the LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1) and LEC1-LIKE (L1L) genes belonging to the HAP3 family CCAAT-binding factors and a subgroup of the plant-specific B3 domain protein family composed\nof the LEC2, FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC ACID (ABA)-INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3 [CLS] ) genes (Giraudat et al., 1992; Lotan et al., 1998; Luerssen et al., 1998; Stone et al., 2001; Kwong et al., 2003).\nA series of studies have detailed the complex"]]
["seedev_train_579", [" including the early acting LEC1 and L1L genes. We suggest that VAL targets Sph/RY-containing genes in the network for chromatin-mediated repression in conjunction with the PKL-related CHD3\nchromatin-remodeling factors.\n [CLS] Embryo development in plants is regulated by a network of transcription factors that include the LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1) and LEC1-LIKE (L1L [CLS] ) genes belonging to the HAP3 family CCAAT-binding factors and a subgroup of the plant-specific B3 domain protein family composed\nof the LEC2, FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC ACID (ABA)-INSENSITIVE 3", " [CLS] embryo development is regulated by a network of transcription factors that include LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1), LEC1-LIKE (L1L [CLS] ), and B3 domain factors, LEAFY COTYLEDON 2 (LEC2), FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3) of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Interactions of these genes result in temporal progression of"]]
["seedev_train_580", [" In addition, ABI3 mediates ABA-regulated gene expression in the seed through interaction with specific basic Leu-zipper transcription factors\nthat bind ABA response elements (Finkelstein et al., 2002). FUS3 and  [CLS] LEC2 are implicated in repression of GA biosynthesis [CLS]  during seed development (Curaba et al., 2004; Gazzarrini et al., 2004). The B3 factors themselves are regulated in part through mutual interactions, as well as unidentified region-specific signals\nwithin", " (Zea mays) ortholog VP1 develop normally, but have dramatically altered ABA-dependent gene expression in vegetative tissues (Parcy et al., 1994; Suzuki et al., 2001).\nA major function of the  [CLS] LEC2, FUS3, and ABI3 B3 transcription factors is activation of genes involved in accumulation of storage protein [CLS]  and lipid reserves in the embryo\nduring seed maturation. Activation of downstream genes is mediated by specific binding of the B3 domain (Suzuki et al., 1997; Kroj et al.,"]]
["seedev_train_581", [" including the early acting LEC1 and L1L genes. We suggest that VAL targets Sph/RY-containing genes in the network for chromatin-mediated repression in conjunction with the PKL-related CHD3\nchromatin-remodeling factors.\n [CLS] Embryo development in plants is regulated by a network of transcription factors that include the LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1) and LEC1-LIKE (L1L) genes belonging to the HAP3 family CCAAT-binding factors and a subgroup of the plant-specific B3 domain protein family composed\nof the LEC2, FUSCA3 (FUS3 [CLS] ), and ABSCISIC ACID (ABA)-INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3) genes (Giraudat et al., 1992; Lotan et al., 1998; Luerssen et al., 1998; Stone et al., 2001; Kwong et al., 2003).\nA series", " [CLS] embryo development is regulated by a network of transcription factors that include LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1), LEC1-LIKE (L1L), and B3 domain factors, LEAFY COTYLEDON 2 (LEC2), FUSCA3 (FUS3 [CLS] ), and ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3) of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Interactions of these genes result in temporal progression of overlapping B3 gene expression culminating in maturation\nand desiccation of", " embryogenesis the FUS3 transcript becomes detectable\u00a02 d.a.p. paralleled by the appearance of the ABI3 mRNA. The finding of co-expression at differing levels, however, is consistent with the fact that  [CLS] FUS3 and ABI3, in a combinatorial and synergistic fashion, control overlapping yet not identical aspects of Arabidopsis seed maturation [CLS]  (Parcy et\u00a0al. 1997). Future studies will have to elucidate to what extent structural similarities of FUS3 and ABI3 contribute to this synergism.\nSo far, FUS3 is the smallest member"]]
["seedev_train_582", [" seed. Three VP1/ABI3-LIKE (VAL) genes encode B3 proteins that include plant homeodomain-like and CW domains associated with chromatin factors. Whereas val monogenic mutants have phenotypes similar to wild type,  [CLS] val1 val2 double-mutant seedlings form no leaves and develop embryo-like proliferations in root and apical meristem [CLS]  regions. In a val1 background, val2 and val3 condition a dominant variegated leaf phenotype revealing a VAL function in vegetative development. Reminiscent of the pickle (pkl) mutant, inhibition of"]]
["seedev_train_583", [" VP1 develop normally, but have dramatically altered ABA-dependent gene expression in vegetative tissues (Parcy et al., 1994; Suzuki et al., 2001).\nA major function of the LEC2, FUS3, and  [CLS] ABI3 B3 transcription factors is activation of genes involved in accumulation of storage protein [CLS]  and lipid reserves in the embryo\nduring seed maturation. Activation of downstream genes is mediated by specific binding of the B3 domain (Suzuki et al., 1997; Kroj et al.,"]]
["seedev_train_584", [" seedlings form no leaves and develop embryo-like proliferations in root and apical meristem regions. In a val1 background, val2 and val3 condition a dominant variegated leaf phenotype revealing a  [CLS] VAL function in vegetative development [CLS] . Reminiscent of the pickle (pkl) mutant, inhibition of gibberellin biosynthesis during germination induces embryonic phenotypes in val1 seedlings. Consistent with the embryonic seedling phenotype, LEC1, L1L, ABI3, and FUS3"]]
["seedev_train_585", [" act early in embryogenesis and initiate a complex progression of B3 transcription factor expression associated with the transition\nfrom embryo morphogenesis to embryo maturation and acquisition of desiccation tolerance.  [CLS] RNA interference of L1L function has been shown to cause embryo arrest [CLS]  during morphogenesis (Kwong et al., 2003), whereas lec1 embryos complete morphogenesis and are capable of further development into plants if rescued prior to desiccation of the\nseed (Meinke, 1992,"]]
["seedev_train_586", [" regulated in part through mutual interactions, as well as unidentified region-specific signals\nwithin the embryo (Kagaya et al., 2005; Santos Mendoza et al., 2005; To et al., 2006).\nThe  [CLS] LEC1/B3 network is repressed prior to germination [CLS]  and resumption of vegetative development.\n"]]
["seedev_train_587", [" al., 1994; West et al., 1994). The fus3 mutant embryos, if rescued, are also viable (Keith et al., 1994; Meinke et al., 1994). Overexpression of LEC2 or FUS3 causes  [CLS] ectopic expression of embryonic traits in vegetative tissues, albeit not as strongly as induced by LEC1 or L1L misexpression [CLS]  (Stone et al., 2001; Tsuchiya et al., 2004). Finally, ABI3 is required for maturation-related and ABA-regulated gene expression and establishment of embryo dormancy during mid-to-late\nembryo development (Koornneef et"]]
["seedev_train_588", [" regulated in part through mutual interactions, as well as unidentified region-specific signals\nwithin the embryo (Kagaya et al., 2005; Santos Mendoza et al., 2005; To et al., 2006).\nThe  [CLS] LEC1/B3 network is repressed prior to germination and resumption of vegetative development [CLS] .\n"]]
["seedev_train_589", [" al., 1994; West et al., 1994). The fus3 mutant embryos, if rescued, are also viable (Keith et al., 1994; Meinke et al., 1994). Overexpression of LEC2 or FUS3 causes  [CLS] ectopic expression of embryonic traits in vegetative tissues, albeit not as strongly as induced by LEC1 or L1L misexpression [CLS]  (Stone et al., 2001; Tsuchiya et al., 2004). Finally, ABI3 is required for maturation-related and ABA-regulated gene expression and establishment of embryo dormancy during mid-to-late\nembryo development (Koornneef et"]]
["seedev_train_590", [" al., 2005). In addition, ABI3 mediates ABA-regulated gene expression in the seed through interaction with specific basic Leu-zipper transcription factors\nthat bind ABA response elements (Finkelstein et al., 2002).  [CLS] FUS3 and LEC2 are implicated in repression of GA biosynthesis [CLS]  during seed development (Curaba et al., 2004; Gazzarrini et al., 2004). The B3 factors themselves are regulated in part through mutual interactions, as well as unidentified region-specific signals\nwithin", " mays) ortholog VP1 develop normally, but have dramatically altered ABA-dependent gene expression in vegetative tissues (Parcy et al., 1994; Suzuki et al., 2001).\nA major function of the LEC2,  [CLS] FUS3, and ABI3 B3 transcription factors is activation of genes involved in accumulation of storage protein [CLS]  and lipid reserves in the embryo\nduring seed maturation. Activation of downstream genes is mediated by specific binding of the B3 domain (Suzuki et al., 1997; Kroj et al.,"]]
["seedev_train_591", [" development (Koornneef et al., 1984). Null abi3 mutant embryos are morphologically almost normal and viable if rescued prior to desiccation (Giraudat et al., 1992; Nambara et al., 1992, 1994).  [CLS] Plants that ectopically express ABI3 or the maize (Zea mays) ortholog VP1 develop normally, but have dramatically altered ABA-dependent gene expression [CLS]  in vegetative tissues (Parcy et al., 1994; Suzuki et al., 2001).\nA major function of the LEC2, FUS3, and ABI3 B3 transcription factors is activation of genes involved in"]]
["seedev_train_592", [" West et al., 1994). Ectopic expression of LEC1 or L1L is sufficient to induce embryo formation in vegetative organs (Lotan et al., 1998; Kwong et al., 2003). The lec1,  [CLS] fus3, and lec2 mutations cause partial transformation of cotyledons to leaf-like organs [CLS]  (Meinke, 1992, 1994; Keith et al., 1994; West et al., 1994). The fus3 mutant embryos, if rescued, are also viable (Keith et al., 1994; Meinke et al., 1994). Overexpression"]]
["seedev_train_593", [" al., 1994). Ectopic expression of LEC1 or L1L is sufficient to induce embryo formation in vegetative organs (Lotan et al., 1998; Kwong et al., 2003). The lec1, fus3, and  [CLS] lec2 mutations cause partial transformation of cotyledons to leaf-like organs [CLS]  (Meinke, 1992, 1994; Keith et al., 1994; West et al., 1994). The fus3 mutant embryos, if rescued, are also viable (Keith et al., 1994; Meinke et al., 1994). Overexpression"]]
["seedev_train_594", [" organs (Meinke, 1992, 1994; Keith et al., 1994; West et al., 1994). The fus3 mutant embryos, if rescued, are also viable (Keith et al., 1994; Meinke et al., 1994).  [CLS] Overexpression of LEC2 or FUS3 causes ectopic expression of embryonic traits in vegetative tissues [CLS] , albeit not as strongly as induced by LEC1 or L1L misexpression (Stone et al., 2001; Tsuchiya et al., 2004). Finally, ABI3 is required for maturation-related and ABA-regulated gene expression"]]
["seedev_train_595", [" causes ectopic expression of embryonic traits in vegetative tissues, albeit not as strongly as induced by LEC1 or L1L misexpression (Stone et al., 2001; Tsuchiya et al., 2004). Finally,  [CLS] ABI3 is required for maturation-related and ABA-regulated gene expression and establishment of embryo dormancy [CLS]  during mid-to-late\nembryo development (Koornneef et al., 1984). Null abi3 mutant embryos are morphologically almost normal and viable if rescued prior to desiccation (Giraudat et al., 1992; Nambara et"]]
["seedev_train_596", [" organs (Meinke, 1992, 1994; Keith et al., 1994; West et al., 1994). The fus3 mutant embryos, if rescued, are also viable (Keith et al., 1994; Meinke et al., 1994).  [CLS] Overexpression of LEC2 or FUS3 causes ectopic expression of embryonic traits in vegetative tissues [CLS] , albeit not as strongly as induced by LEC1 or L1L misexpression (Stone et al., 2001; Tsuchiya et al., 2004). Finally, ABI3 is required for maturation-related and ABA-regulated gene expression"]]
["seedev_train_597", [" 1994; West et al., 1994). Ectopic expression of LEC1 or L1L is sufficient to induce embryo formation in vegetative organs (Lotan et al., 1998; Kwong et al., 2003). The  [CLS] lec1, fus3, and lec2 mutations cause partial transformation of cotyledons to leaf-like organs [CLS]  (Meinke, 1992, 1994; Keith et al., 1994; West et al., 1994). The fus3 mutant embryos, if rescued, are also viable (Keith et al., 1994; Meinke et al., 1994). Overexpression"]]
["seedev_train_598", [" development (Koornneef et al., 1984). Null abi3 mutant embryos are morphologically almost normal and viable if rescued prior to desiccation (Giraudat et al., 1992; Nambara et al., 1992, 1994).  [CLS] Plants that ectopically express ABI3 or the maize (Zea mays) ortholog VP1 develop normally, but have dramatically altered ABA-dependent gene expression [CLS]  in vegetative tissues (Parcy et al., 1994; Suzuki et al., 2001).\nA major function of the LEC2, FUS3, and ABI3 B3 transcription factors is activation of genes involved in"]]
["seedev_train_599", [" 2003), whereas lec1 embryos complete morphogenesis and are capable of further development into plants if rescued prior to desiccation of the\nseed (Meinke, 1992, 1994; West et al., 1994).  [CLS] Ectopic expression of LEC1 or L1L is sufficient to induce embryo formation in vegetative organs [CLS]  (Lotan et al., 1998; Kwong et al., 2003). The lec1, fus3, and lec2 mutations cause partial transformation of cotyledons to leaf-like organs (Meinke, 1992, 1994; Keith et al., 1994;"]]
["seedev_train_600", [" enriched in the\npromoters and first introns of VAL-repressed genes, including the early acting LEC1 and L1L genes. We suggest that VAL targets Sph/RY-containing genes in the network for  [CLS] chromatin-mediated repression in conjunction with the PKL-related CHD3\nchromatin-remodeling factors [CLS] .\nEmbryo development in plants is regulated by a network of transcription factors that include the LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1) and LEC1-LIKE (L1L) genes belonging to the HAP3 family CCAAT-binding"]]
["seedev_train_601", [" a network of transcription factors that include the LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1) and LEC1-LIKE (L1L) genes belonging to the HAP3 family CCAAT-binding factors and a subgroup of the plant-specific  [CLS] B3 domain protein family composed\nof the LEC2, FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC ACID (ABA)-INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3 [CLS] ) genes (Giraudat et al., 1992; Lotan et al., 1998; Luerssen et al., 1998; Stone et al., 2001; Kwong et al., 2003).\nA series of studies have detailed the complex", " [CLS] B3 domain factors, LEAFY COTYLEDON 2 (LEC2), FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3 [CLS] ) of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Interactions of these genes result in temporal progression of overlapping B3 gene expression culminating in maturation\nand desiccation of the seed. Three VP1/ABI3-LIKE (VAL) genes", " VP1 develop normally, but have dramatically altered ABA-dependent gene expression in vegetative tissues (Parcy et al., 1994; Suzuki et al., 2001).\nA major function of the LEC2, FUS3, and  [CLS] ABI3 B3 transcription factors [CLS]  is activation of genes involved in accumulation of storage protein and lipid reserves in the embryo\nduring seed maturation. Activation of downstream genes is mediated by specific binding of"]]
["seedev_train_602", [" in conjunction with the PKL-related CHD3\nchromatin-remodeling factors.\nEmbryo development in plants is regulated by a network of transcription factors that include the LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1) and LEC1-LIKE ( [CLS] L1L) genes belonging to the HAP3 family [CLS]  CCAAT-binding factors and a subgroup of the plant-specific B3 domain protein family composed\nof the LEC2, FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC ACID (ABA)-INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3) genes (Giraudat et al., 1992;"]]
["seedev_train_603", [" global shift in gene expression to a profile resembling late-torpedo-stage embryogenesis.\nHence, VAL factors function as global repressors of the LEC1/B3 gene system. The consensus binding site of the  [CLS] ABI3/FUS3/LEC2 B3 DNA-binding domain [CLS]  (Sph/RY) is strongly enriched in the\npromoters and first introns of VAL-repressed genes, including the early acting LEC1 and L1L genes. We suggest that VAL targets Sph/RY-containing genes in", " global shift in gene expression to a profile resembling late-torpedo-stage embryogenesis.\nHence, VAL factors function as global repressors of the LEC1/B3 gene system. The consensus binding site of the ABI3/FUS3/ [CLS] LEC2 B3 DNA-binding domain [CLS]  (Sph/RY) is strongly enriched in the\npromoters and first introns of VAL-repressed genes, including the early acting LEC1 and L1L genes. We suggest that VAL targets Sph/RY-containing genes in", " global shift in gene expression to a profile resembling late-torpedo-stage embryogenesis.\nHence, VAL factors function as global repressors of the LEC1/B3 gene system. The consensus binding site of the ABI3/ [CLS] FUS3/LEC2 B3 DNA-binding domain [CLS]  (Sph/RY) is strongly enriched in the\npromoters and first introns of VAL-repressed genes, including the early acting LEC1 and L1L genes. We suggest that VAL targets Sph/RY-containing genes in"]]
["seedev_train_604", [" expression to a profile resembling late-torpedo-stage embryogenesis.\nHence, VAL factors function as global repressors of the LEC1/B3 gene system. The consensus binding site of the ABI3/FUS3/LEC2 B3 DNA-binding domain ( [CLS] Sph/RY) is strongly enriched in the\npromoters and first introns of VAL-repressed genes, including the early acting LEC1 and L1L [CLS]  genes. We suggest that VAL targets Sph/RY-containing genes in the network for chromatin-mediated repression in conjunction with the PKL-related CHD3\nchromatin-remodeling factors.\nEmbryo development in plants is regulated by", " expression to a profile resembling late-torpedo-stage embryogenesis.\nHence, VAL factors function as global repressors of the LEC1/B3 gene system. The consensus binding site of the ABI3/FUS3/LEC2 B3 DNA-binding domain ( [CLS] Sph/RY) is strongly enriched in the\npromoters and first introns of VAL-repressed genes, including the early acting LEC1 [CLS]  and L1L genes. We suggest that VAL targets Sph/RY-containing genes in the network for chromatin-mediated repression in conjunction with the PKL-related CHD3\nchromatin-remodeling factors.\nEmbryo development in plants is"]]
["seedev_train_605", [" seed. Three VP1/ABI3-LIKE (VAL) genes encode B3 proteins that include plant homeodomain-like and CW domains associated with chromatin factors. Whereas val monogenic mutants have phenotypes similar to wild type,  [CLS] val1 val2 double-mutant seedlings form no leaves [CLS]  and develop embryo-like proliferations in root and apical meristem regions. In a val1 background, val2 and val3 condition a dominant variegated leaf phenotype revealing a VAL function in vegetative"]]
["seedev_train_606", [" Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Interactions of these genes result in temporal progression of overlapping B3 gene expression culminating in maturation\nand desiccation of the seed. Three VP1/ABI3-LIKE (VAL) genes encode  [CLS] B3 proteins that include plant homeodomain-like [CLS]  and CW domains associated with chromatin factors. Whereas val monogenic mutants have phenotypes similar to wild type, val1 val2 double-mutant seedlings form no leaves and develop embryo-like proliferations in"]]
["seedev_train_607", [" Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Interactions of these genes result in temporal progression of overlapping B3 gene expression culminating in maturation\nand desiccation of the seed. Three VP1/ABI3-LIKE (VAL) genes encode  [CLS] B3 proteins that include plant homeodomain-like and CW domains [CLS]  associated with chromatin factors. Whereas val monogenic mutants have phenotypes similar to wild type, val1 val2 double-mutant seedlings form no leaves and develop embryo-like proliferations in root and apical"]]
["seedev_train_608", [" expression to a profile resembling late-torpedo-stage embryogenesis.\nHence, VAL factors function as global repressors of the LEC1/B3 gene system. The consensus binding site of the ABI3/FUS3/LEC2 B3 DNA-binding domain ( [CLS] Sph/RY) is strongly enriched in the\npromoters and first introns of VAL-repressed genes [CLS] , including the early acting LEC1 and L1L genes. We suggest that VAL targets Sph/RY-containing genes in the network for chromatin-mediated repression in conjunction with the PKL-related CHD3\nchromatin-remodeling factors.", " expression to a profile resembling late-torpedo-stage embryogenesis.\nHence, VAL factors function as global repressors of the LEC1/B3 gene system. The consensus binding site of the ABI3/FUS3/LEC2 B3 DNA-binding domain ( [CLS] Sph/RY) is strongly enriched in the\npromoters and first introns of VAL-repressed genes [CLS] , including the early acting LEC1 and L1L genes. We suggest that VAL targets Sph/RY-containing genes in the network for chromatin-mediated repression in conjunction with the PKL-related CHD3\nchromatin-remodeling factors."]]
["seedev_train_609", [" mutant embryos are morphologically almost normal and viable if rescued prior to desiccation (Giraudat et al., 1992; Nambara et al., 1992, 1994). Plants that ectopically express ABI3 or the  [CLS] maize (Zea mays) ortholog VP1 [CLS]  develop normally, but have dramatically altered ABA-dependent gene expression in vegetative tissues (Parcy et al., 1994; Suzuki et al., 2001).\nA major function of the LEC2, FUS3, and ABI3"]]
["seedev_train_610", [" seedling phenotype, LEC1, L1L, ABI3, and FUS3 are up-regulated in val1 val2 seedlings in association with a global shift in gene expression to a profile resembling late-torpedo-stage embryogenesis.\nHence,  [CLS] VAL factors function as global repressors of the LEC1/B3 gene system [CLS] . The consensus binding site of the ABI3/FUS3/LEC2 B3 DNA-binding domain (Sph/RY) is strongly enriched in the\npromoters and first introns of VAL-repressed genes, including the early acting LEC1 and"]]
["seedev_train_611", [" development. Reminiscent of the pickle (pkl) mutant, inhibition of gibberellin biosynthesis during germination induces embryonic phenotypes in val1 seedlings. Consistent with the embryonic seedling phenotype, LEC1, L1L, ABI3, and  [CLS] FUS3 are up-regulated in val1 val2 [CLS]  seedlings in association with a global shift in gene expression to a profile resembling late-torpedo-stage embryogenesis.\nHence, VAL factors function as global repressors of the LEC1/B3 gene system. The", " VAL function in vegetative development. Reminiscent of the pickle (pkl) mutant, inhibition of gibberellin biosynthesis during germination induces embryonic phenotypes in val1 seedlings. Consistent with the embryonic seedling phenotype,  [CLS] LEC1, L1L, ABI3, and FUS3 are up-regulated in val1 val2 [CLS]  seedlings in association with a global shift in gene expression to a profile resembling late-torpedo-stage embryogenesis.\nHence, VAL factors function as global repressors of the LEC1/B3 gene system. The", " in vegetative development. Reminiscent of the pickle (pkl) mutant, inhibition of gibberellin biosynthesis during germination induces embryonic phenotypes in val1 seedlings. Consistent with the embryonic seedling phenotype, LEC1, L1L,  [CLS] ABI3, and FUS3 are up-regulated in val1 val2 [CLS]  seedlings in association with a global shift in gene expression to a profile resembling late-torpedo-stage embryogenesis.\nHence, VAL factors function as global repressors of the LEC1/B3 gene system. The", " function in vegetative development. Reminiscent of the pickle (pkl) mutant, inhibition of gibberellin biosynthesis during germination induces embryonic phenotypes in val1 seedlings. Consistent with the embryonic seedling phenotype, LEC1,  [CLS] L1L, ABI3, and FUS3 are up-regulated in val1 val2 [CLS]  seedlings in association with a global shift in gene expression to a profile resembling late-torpedo-stage embryogenesis.\nHence, VAL factors function as global repressors of the LEC1/B3 gene system. The"]]
["seedev_train_612", [" Nambara et al., 2000; Raz et al., 2001; Brocard-Gifford et al., 2003; Baumbusch et al., 2004; Kagaya et al., 2005; Santos Mendoza et al., 2005; To et al., 2006).  [CLS] LEC1 and L1L act early in embryogenesis [CLS]  and initiate a complex progression of B3 transcription factor expression associated with the transition\nfrom embryo morphogenesis to embryo maturation and acquisition of desiccation tolerance. RNA interference of L1L", " al., 2000; Raz et al., 2001; Brocard-Gifford et al., 2003; Baumbusch et al., 2004; Kagaya et al., 2005; Santos Mendoza et al., 2005; To et al., 2006). LEC1 and  [CLS] L1L act early in embryogenesis [CLS]  and initiate a complex progression of B3 transcription factor expression associated with the transition\nfrom embryo morphogenesis to embryo maturation and acquisition of desiccation tolerance. RNA interference of L1L"]]
["seedev_train_613", [" the ABI3/FUS3/LEC2 B3 DNA-binding domain (Sph/RY) is strongly enriched in the\npromoters and first introns of VAL-repressed genes, including the early acting LEC1 and L1L genes. We suggest that  [CLS] VAL targets Sph/RY [CLS] -containing genes in the network for chromatin-mediated repression in conjunction with the PKL-related CHD3\nchromatin-remodeling factors.\nEmbryo development in plants is regulated by a network of transcription factors that include"]]
["seedev_train_614", [" the Sph/RY cis-element (Hattori et al., 1992; Kao et al., 1996; Ezcurra et al., 1999; Reidt et al., 2000; Chandrasekharan et al., 2003; Nag et al., 2005). In addition,  [CLS] ABI3 mediates ABA-regulated gene expression in the seed through interaction with specific basic Leu-zipper transcription factors [CLS] \nthat bind ABA response elements (Finkelstein et al., 2002). FUS3 and LEC2 are implicated in repression of GA biosynthesis during seed development (Curaba et al., 2004; Gazzarrini et al.,"]]
["seedev_train_615", [" 3 (ABI3) of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Interactions of these genes result in temporal progression of overlapping B3 gene expression culminating in maturation\nand desiccation of the seed. Three VP1/ABI3-LIKE ( [CLS] VAL) genes encode B3 proteins [CLS]  that include plant homeodomain-like and CW domains associated with chromatin factors. Whereas val monogenic mutants have phenotypes similar to wild type, val1 val2 double-mutant seedlings form no leaves and"]]
["seedev_train_616", [" et al., 1999; Reidt et al., 2000; Chandrasekharan et al., 2003; Nag et al., 2005). In addition, ABI3 mediates ABA-regulated gene expression in the seed through interaction with specific  [CLS] basic Leu-zipper transcription factors\nthat bind ABA response elements [CLS]  (Finkelstein et al., 2002). FUS3 and LEC2 are implicated in repression of GA biosynthesis during seed development (Curaba et al., 2004; Gazzarrini et al., 2004). The B3 factors themselves"]]
["seedev_train_617", [" activation of genes involved in accumulation of storage protein and lipid reserves in the embryo\nduring seed maturation. Activation of downstream genes is mediated by specific binding of the  [CLS] B3 domain (Suzuki et al., 1997; Kroj et al., 2003; Carranco et al., 2004; Monke et al., 2004; Braybrook et al., 2006) to the Sph/RY [CLS]  cis-element (Hattori et al., 1992; Kao et al., 1996; Ezcurra et al., 1999; Reidt et al., 2000; Chandrasekharan et al., 2003; Nag et al., 2005). In addition, ABI3 mediates"]]
["seedev_train_618", [" shift in gene expression to a profile resembling late-torpedo-stage embryogenesis.\nHence, VAL factors function as global repressors of the LEC1/B3 gene system. The consensus binding site of the ABI3/FUS3/LEC2  [CLS] B3 DNA-binding domain (Sph/RY [CLS] ) is strongly enriched in the\npromoters and first introns of VAL-repressed genes, including the early acting LEC1 and L1L genes. We suggest that VAL targets Sph/RY-containing genes in the"]]
["seedev_train_619", [" by a network of transcription factors that include LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1), LEC1-LIKE (L1L), and B3 domain factors, LEAFY COTYLEDON 2 (LEC2), FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE 3 ( [CLS] ABI3) of Arabidopsis [CLS]  (Arabidopsis thaliana). Interactions of these genes result in temporal progression of overlapping B3 gene expression culminating in maturation\nand desiccation of the seed. Three VP1/ABI3-LIKE (VAL) genes encode B3", " acting LEC1 and L1L genes. We suggest that VAL targets Sph/RY-containing genes in the network for chromatin-mediated repression in conjunction with the PKL-related CHD3\nchromatin-remodeling factors.\nEmbryo development in  [CLS] plants is regulated by a network of transcription factors that include the LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1) and LEC1-LIKE (L1L) genes belonging to the HAP3 family CCAAT-binding factors and a subgroup of the plant-specific B3 domain protein family composed\nof the LEC2, FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC ACID (ABA)-INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3 [CLS] ) genes (Giraudat et al., 1992; Lotan et al., 1998; Luerssen et al., 1998; Stone et al., 2001; Kwong et al., 2003).\nA series of studies have detailed the complex"]]
["seedev_train_620", [" acting LEC1 and L1L genes. We suggest that VAL targets Sph/RY-containing genes in the network for chromatin-mediated repression in conjunction with the PKL-related CHD3\nchromatin-remodeling factors.\nEmbryo development in  [CLS] plants is regulated by a network of transcription factors that include the LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1) and LEC1-LIKE (L1L [CLS] ) genes belonging to the HAP3 family CCAAT-binding factors and a subgroup of the plant-specific B3 domain protein family composed\nof the LEC2, FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC ACID (ABA)-INSENSITIVE 3", " [CLS] L1L), and B3 domain factors, LEAFY COTYLEDON 2 (LEC2), FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3) of Arabidopsis [CLS]  (Arabidopsis thaliana). Interactions of these genes result in temporal progression of overlapping B3 gene expression culminating in maturation\nand desiccation of the seed. Three VP1/ABI3-LIKE (VAL) genes encode B3"]]
["seedev_train_621", [" acting LEC1 and L1L genes. We suggest that VAL targets Sph/RY-containing genes in the network for chromatin-mediated repression in conjunction with the PKL-related CHD3\nchromatin-remodeling factors.\nEmbryo development in  [CLS] plants is regulated by a network of transcription factors that include the LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1 [CLS] ) and LEC1-LIKE (L1L) genes belonging to the HAP3 family CCAAT-binding factors and a subgroup of the plant-specific B3 domain protein family composed\nof the LEC2, FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC", " [CLS] LEC1), LEC1-LIKE (L1L), and B3 domain factors, LEAFY COTYLEDON 2 (LEC2), FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3) of Arabidopsis [CLS]  (Arabidopsis thaliana). Interactions of these genes result in temporal progression of overlapping B3 gene expression culminating in maturation\nand desiccation of the seed. Three VP1/ABI3-LIKE (VAL) genes encode B3", " [CLS] Arabidopsis LEAFY COTYLEDON1 (LEC1 [CLS] ) gene is required for the specification of cotyledon identity and the completion of embryo maturation. We isolated the LEC1 gene and showed that it functions at an early developmental"]]
["seedev_train_622", [" acting LEC1 and L1L genes. We suggest that VAL targets Sph/RY-containing genes in the network for chromatin-mediated repression in conjunction with the PKL-related CHD3\nchromatin-remodeling factors.\nEmbryo development in  [CLS] plants is regulated by a network of transcription factors that include the LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1) and LEC1-LIKE (L1L) genes belonging to the HAP3 family CCAAT-binding factors and a subgroup of the plant-specific B3 domain protein family composed\nof the LEC2, FUSCA3 (FUS3 [CLS] ), and ABSCISIC ACID (ABA)-INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3) genes (Giraudat et al., 1992; Lotan et al., 1998; Luerssen et al., 1998; Stone et al., 2001; Kwong et al., 2003).\nA series", " [CLS] FUS3), and ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3) of Arabidopsis [CLS]  (Arabidopsis thaliana). Interactions of these genes result in temporal progression of overlapping B3 gene expression culminating in maturation\nand desiccation of the seed. Three VP1/ABI3-LIKE (VAL) genes encode B3", " embryogenesis the FUS3 transcript becomes detectable\u00a02 d.a.p. paralleled by the appearance of the ABI3 mRNA. The finding of co-expression at differing levels, however, is consistent with the fact that  [CLS] FUS3 and ABI3, in a combinatorial and synergistic fashion, control overlapping yet not identical aspects of Arabidopsis [CLS]  seed maturation (Parcy et\u00a0al. 1997). Future studies will have to elucidate to what extent structural similarities of FUS3 and ABI3 contribute to this synergism.\nSo far, FUS3 is the"]]
["seedev_train_623", [" VP1 develop normally, but have dramatically altered ABA-dependent gene expression in vegetative tissues (Parcy et al., 1994; Suzuki et al., 2001).\nA major function of the LEC2, FUS3, and  [CLS] ABI3 B3 transcription factors is activation of genes involved in accumulation of storage protein and lipid reserves in the embryo [CLS] \nduring seed maturation. Activation of downstream genes is mediated by specific binding of the B3 domain (Suzuki et al., 1997; Kroj et al., 2003; Carranco et al., 2004; Monke"]]
["seedev_train_624", [" the Sph/RY cis-element (Hattori et al., 1992; Kao et al., 1996; Ezcurra et al., 1999; Reidt et al., 2000; Chandrasekharan et al., 2003; Nag et al., 2005). In addition,  [CLS] ABI3 mediates ABA-regulated gene expression in the seed [CLS]  through interaction with specific basic Leu-zipper transcription factors\nthat bind ABA response elements (Finkelstein et al., 2002). FUS3 and LEC2 are implicated in repression of GA biosynthesis during seed", " a synergistic increase in target gene activation.\nFull-level target gene activation is strongly correlated with the ratio of the correspondent bZIP heterodimerization partners.\nWhereas bZIP53 does not interact with  [CLS] ABI3, a crucial transcriptional regulator in Arabidopsis seeds [CLS] , ternary complex formation between the bZIP heterodimers and ABI3 increases the expression of MAT genes in planta.\nWe therefore propose that heterodimers containing bZIP53 participate in enhanceosome formation to"]]
["seedev_train_625", [" In addition, ABI3 mediates ABA-regulated gene expression in the seed through interaction with specific basic Leu-zipper transcription factors\nthat bind ABA response elements (Finkelstein et al., 2002). FUS3 and  [CLS] LEC2 are implicated in repression of GA biosynthesis during seed development [CLS]  (Curaba et al., 2004; Gazzarrini et al., 2004). The B3 factors themselves are regulated in part through mutual interactions, as well as unidentified region-specific signals\nwithin the embryo (Kagaya", " al., 2005). In addition, ABI3 mediates ABA-regulated gene expression in the seed through interaction with specific basic Leu-zipper transcription factors\nthat bind ABA response elements (Finkelstein et al., 2002).  [CLS] FUS3 and LEC2 are implicated in repression of GA biosynthesis during seed development [CLS]  (Curaba et al., 2004; Gazzarrini et al., 2004). The B3 factors themselves are regulated in part through mutual interactions, as well as unidentified region-specific signals\nwithin the embryo (Kagaya"]]
["seedev_train_626", [" VP1 develop normally, but have dramatically altered ABA-dependent gene expression in vegetative tissues (Parcy et al., 1994; Suzuki et al., 2001).\nA major function of the LEC2, FUS3, and  [CLS] ABI3 B3 transcription factors is activation of genes involved in accumulation of storage protein and lipid reserves in the embryo\nduring seed maturation [CLS] . Activation of downstream genes is mediated by specific binding of the B3 domain (Suzuki et al., 1997; Kroj et al., 2003; Carranco et al., 2004; Monke et al., 2004;"]]
["seedev_train_627", [" mays) ortholog VP1 develop normally, but have dramatically altered ABA-dependent gene expression in vegetative tissues (Parcy et al., 1994; Suzuki et al., 2001).\nA major function of the LEC2,  [CLS] FUS3, and ABI3 B3 transcription factors is activation of genes involved in accumulation of storage protein and lipid reserves in the embryo\nduring seed maturation [CLS] . Activation of downstream genes is mediated by specific binding of the B3 domain (Suzuki et al., 1997; Kroj et al., 2003; Carranco et al., 2004; Monke et al., 2004;", " (Zea mays) ortholog VP1 develop normally, but have dramatically altered ABA-dependent gene expression in vegetative tissues (Parcy et al., 1994; Suzuki et al., 2001).\nA major function of the  [CLS] LEC2, FUS3, and ABI3 B3 transcription factors is activation of genes involved in accumulation of storage protein and lipid reserves in the embryo\nduring seed maturation [CLS] . Activation of downstream genes is mediated by specific binding of the B3 domain (Suzuki et al., 1997; Kroj et al., 2003; Carranco et al., 2004; Monke et al., 2004;"]]
["seedev_train_628", [" causes ectopic expression of embryonic traits in vegetative tissues, albeit not as strongly as induced by LEC1 or L1L misexpression (Stone et al., 2001; Tsuchiya et al., 2004). Finally,  [CLS] ABI3 is required for maturation-related and ABA-regulated gene expression and establishment of embryo dormancy during mid-to-late\nembryo development [CLS]  (Koornneef et al., 1984). Null abi3 mutant embryos are morphologically almost normal and viable if rescued prior to desiccation (Giraudat et al., 1992; Nambara et al., 1992, 1994). Plants"]]
["seedev_train_629", [" cis-element (Hattori et al., 1992; Kao et al., 1996; Ezcurra et al., 1999; Reidt et al., 2000; Chandrasekharan et al., 2003; Nag et al., 2005). In addition, ABI3 mediates  [CLS] ABA-regulated gene expression in the seed [CLS]  through interaction with specific basic Leu-zipper transcription factors\nthat bind ABA response elements (Finkelstein et al., 2002). FUS3 and LEC2 are implicated in repression of GA biosynthesis during seed"]]
["seedev_train_630", [" not as strongly as induced by LEC1 or L1L misexpression (Stone et al., 2001; Tsuchiya et al., 2004). Finally, ABI3 is required for maturation-related and ABA-regulated gene expression and  [CLS] establishment of embryo dormancy during mid-to-late\nembryo development [CLS]  (Koornneef et al., 1984). Null abi3 mutant embryos are morphologically almost normal and viable if rescued prior to desiccation (Giraudat et al., 1992; Nambara et al., 1992, 1994). Plants"]]
["seedev_train_631", [" prior to desiccation (Giraudat et al., 1992; Nambara et al., 1992, 1994). Plants that ectopically express ABI3 or the maize (Zea mays) ortholog VP1 develop normally, but have dramatically  [CLS] altered ABA-dependent gene expression in vegetative tissues [CLS]  (Parcy et al., 1994; Suzuki et al., 2001).\nA major function of the LEC2, FUS3, and ABI3 B3 transcription factors is activation of genes involved in accumulation of storage"]]
["seedev_train_632", [" in vegetative tissues (Parcy et al., 1994; Suzuki et al., 2001).\nA major function of the LEC2, FUS3, and ABI3 B3 transcription factors is activation of genes involved in  [CLS] accumulation of storage protein and lipid reserves in the embryo [CLS] \nduring seed maturation. Activation of downstream genes is mediated by specific binding of the B3 domain (Suzuki et al., 1997; Kroj et al., 2003; Carranco et al., 2004; Monke"]]
["seedev_train_633", [" in vegetative tissues (Parcy et al., 1994; Suzuki et al., 2001).\nA major function of the LEC2, FUS3, and ABI3 B3 transcription factors is activation of genes involved in  [CLS] accumulation of storage protein and lipid reserves in the embryo\nduring seed maturation [CLS] . Activation of downstream genes is mediated by specific binding of the B3 domain (Suzuki et al., 1997; Kroj et al., 2003; Carranco et al., 2004; Monke et al., 2004;"]]
["seedev_train_634", [" development. Reminiscent of the pickle (pkl) mutant, inhibition of gibberellin biosynthesis during germination induces embryonic phenotypes in val1 seedlings. Consistent with the embryonic seedling phenotype, LEC1, L1L, ABI3, and  [CLS] FUS3 are up-regulated in val1 val2 seedlings [CLS]  in association with a global shift in gene expression to a profile resembling late-torpedo-stage embryogenesis.\nHence, VAL factors function as global repressors of the LEC1/B3 gene system. The consensus", " VAL function in vegetative development. Reminiscent of the pickle (pkl) mutant, inhibition of gibberellin biosynthesis during germination induces embryonic phenotypes in val1 seedlings. Consistent with the embryonic seedling phenotype,  [CLS] LEC1, L1L, ABI3, and FUS3 are up-regulated in val1 val2 seedlings [CLS]  in association with a global shift in gene expression to a profile resembling late-torpedo-stage embryogenesis.\nHence, VAL factors function as global repressors of the LEC1/B3 gene system. The consensus", " in vegetative development. Reminiscent of the pickle (pkl) mutant, inhibition of gibberellin biosynthesis during germination induces embryonic phenotypes in val1 seedlings. Consistent with the embryonic seedling phenotype, LEC1, L1L,  [CLS] ABI3, and FUS3 are up-regulated in val1 val2 seedlings [CLS]  in association with a global shift in gene expression to a profile resembling late-torpedo-stage embryogenesis.\nHence, VAL factors function as global repressors of the LEC1/B3 gene system. The consensus", " function in vegetative development. Reminiscent of the pickle (pkl) mutant, inhibition of gibberellin biosynthesis during germination induces embryonic phenotypes in val1 seedlings. Consistent with the embryonic seedling phenotype, LEC1,  [CLS] L1L, ABI3, and FUS3 are up-regulated in val1 val2 seedlings [CLS]  in association with a global shift in gene expression to a profile resembling late-torpedo-stage embryogenesis.\nHence, VAL factors function as global repressors of the LEC1/B3 gene system. The consensus", " unaffected by ectopic expression of SAP18 alone, possibly indicating a more specific interaction at these loci. We have demonstrated that AGL15 binds to LEA76 (At1g52690) (Figure 6a), and that  [CLS] LEA76 is repressed by AGL15 and/or SAP18 in a variety of tissues, including seedlings [CLS]  (Figure 5). Published results support a role for SIN3/HDAC1-mediated repression in regulation of LEA76: trichostatin\u00a0A, a specific inhibitor of HDAC, causes an increase in LEA76 transcript during seed germination"]]
["seedev_train_635", [" ERF genes, as a transcriptional activator (Ogawa et al., 2005). AtEBP is regulated by an ethylene signal (B\u00fcttner and Singh, 1997; Ogawa et al., 2005). It was clarified that  [CLS] AtEBP is regulated by EIN2, but not EIN3 [CLS] , suggesting that AtEBP expression is independently regulated under EIN3 in ethylene signalling. Interestingly, it was reported that AtEBP expression was regulated by AP2 (Okamuro et al., 1997). Nevertheless, relationships", " AtEBP is regulated by an ethylene signal (B\u00fcttner and Singh, 1997; Ogawa et al., 2005). It was clarified that AtEBP is regulated by EIN2, but not EIN3, suggesting that  [CLS] AtEBP expression is independently regulated under EIN3 [CLS]  in ethylene signalling. Interestingly, it was reported that AtEBP expression was regulated by AP2 (Okamuro et al., 1997). Nevertheless, relationships between AtEBP and AP2 in ethylene signal transduction have", " than ein2 mutants (Wang et al., 2002). Previous studies reported that both EIN3-dependent and independent pathways exist downstream of EIN2 (Binder et al., 2004; Seifert et al., 2004). Furthermore,  [CLS] AtEBP expression is independently regulated under EIN3 [CLS]  in ethylene signalling (Ogawa et al., 2005; this study). In this study, AP2 was not induced by ethylene despite increasing expression of AtEBP. We suggest that these signal transductions"]]
["seedev_train_636", [" ERF genes, as a transcriptional activator (Ogawa et al., 2005). AtEBP is regulated by an ethylene signal (B\u00fcttner and Singh, 1997; Ogawa et al., 2005). It was clarified that  [CLS] AtEBP is regulated by EIN2 [CLS] , but not EIN3, suggesting that AtEBP expression is independently regulated under EIN3 in ethylene signalling. Interestingly, it was reported that AtEBP expression was regulated by AP2 (Okamuro et al.,", " ethylene responsiveness. On the other hand, the C-terminal of EIN2\nis required for transducing the signal to the downstream components (Wang et al., 2002). Our observations suggested that the  [CLS] AP2 expression was induced via EIN2 [CLS]  but not by the ethylene signal (Fig.\u00a07).\n", " RNAs (Chen, 2004) and AP2 protein down-regulates AP2 and AtEBP expression (Okamuro et al., 1997; this study), as indicated in grey. In the current study, it was demonstrated that  [CLS] AP2 expression was regulated through AtEBP and EIN2 [CLS] , and that AtEBP may contribute to floral development, as indicated by in\nblack.\nThe AP2 mRNA level did not change in the ein3-1 mutant. The position of EIN3 is", " accumulation of AP2 mRNA in Arabidopsis over-expressing AtEBP is not sufficient to change flower development.\nThis study has shown the mutual relationships between AP2 and AtEBP. AtEBP and functional  [CLS] EIN2 affected the transcriptional regulation of AP2 [CLS] . AtEBP contributed slightly to flower development, especially stamen development. Future reports in this series will focus\non the homeotic role of AtEBP.\n"]]
["seedev_train_637", [" expression was regulated by AP2 (Okamuro et al., 1997). Nevertheless, relationships between AtEBP and AP2 in ethylene signal transduction have not been investigated in detail.\nHere, we show that  [CLS] AP2 regulates ERF [CLS]  genes such as AtEBP and AtERF1, and the over-expression of AtEBP causes the accumulation of AP2 transcripts.\n", " al., 2000). It is known that AP2 suppresses expression of AGAMOUS, the C gene of a floral homeotic gene (Drews et al., 1991; Bomblies et al., 1999). In addition,  [CLS] AP2 regulates the expression of ethylene-responsive factor (ERF [CLS] ) genes containing one AP2/EREBP domain (Okamuro et al., 1997). However, the relationship of the transcriptional regulation between AP2 and ERF genes is not fully understood.\nPreviously, we characterized Arabidopsis", " not been well understood (Okamuro et al., 1997).\nThe current study showed that AP2 activity repressed AtEBP, AtERF1 and AP2 expression. This is consistent with previous results showing that  [CLS] AP2 regulates its own AP2 expression (Okamuro et al., 1997; Chen, 2004) as well as other genes, such as the ERF [CLS]  genes.\nIn addition, over-expression of AtEBP increased the expression level of AP2. AtEBP is a transcriptional activator interacting with GCC-box, an ethylene-responsive element (B\u00fcttner and Singh, 1997). Although the"]]
["seedev_train_638", [" ERF genes is not fully understood.\nPreviously, we characterized Arabidopsis thaliana ethylene-responsive element binding protein (AtEBP), one of the ERF genes, as a transcriptional activator (Ogawa et al., 2005).  [CLS] AtEBP is regulated by an ethylene signal [CLS]  (B\u00fcttner and Singh, 1997; Ogawa et al., 2005). It was clarified that AtEBP is regulated by EIN2, but not EIN3, suggesting that AtEBP expression is independently regulated under EIN3", " ethylene responsiveness. On the other hand, the C-terminal of EIN2\nis required for transducing the signal to the downstream components (Wang et al., 2002). Our observations suggested that the  [CLS] AP2 expression was induced via EIN2 but not by the ethylene signal [CLS]  (Fig.\u00a07).\n"]]
["seedev_train_639", [" (AP2) gene, which belongs to the A class of genes, exhibits several characteristics distinct from other ABC genes. Although most\nABC genes contain a MADS domain, AP2 contains two  [CLS] APETALA2/ethylene-responsive element binding protein (AP2 [CLS] /EREBP) domains (Jofuku et al., 1994). The AP2 transcript is not observed in a region-specific pattern in the four wholes of flower, and is detected in other vegetative\ntissues (Jofuku"]]
["seedev_train_640", [" (AP2) gene, which belongs to the A class of genes, exhibits several characteristics distinct from other ABC genes. Although most\nABC genes contain a MADS domain, AP2 contains two APETALA2/ [CLS] ethylene-responsive element binding protein (AP2/EREBP [CLS] ) domains (Jofuku et al., 1994). The AP2 transcript is not observed in a region-specific pattern in the four wholes of flower, and is detected in other vegetative\ntissues (Jofuku"]]
["seedev_train_641", [" that AP2 suppresses expression of AGAMOUS, the C gene of a floral homeotic gene (Drews et al., 1991; Bomblies et al., 1999). In addition, AP2 regulates the expression of  [CLS] ethylene-responsive factor (ERF [CLS] ) genes containing one AP2/EREBP domain (Okamuro et al., 1997). However, the relationship of the transcriptional regulation between AP2 and ERF genes is not fully understood.\nPreviously, we characterized Arabidopsis"]]
["seedev_train_642", [" (AP2) gene, which belongs to the A class of genes, exhibits several characteristics distinct from other ABC genes. Although most\nABC genes contain a MADS domain, AP2 contains two  [CLS] APETALA2/ethylene-responsive element binding protein (AP2/EREBP [CLS] ) domains (Jofuku et al., 1994). The AP2 transcript is not observed in a region-specific pattern in the four wholes of flower, and is detected in other vegetative\ntissues (Jofuku"]]
["seedev_train_643", [" (ERF) genes containing one AP2/EREBP domain (Okamuro et al., 1997). However, the relationship of the transcriptional regulation between AP2 and ERF genes is not fully understood.\nPreviously, we characterized  [CLS] Arabidopsis thaliana ethylene-responsive element binding protein (AtEBP [CLS] ), one of the ERF genes, as a transcriptional activator (Ogawa et al., 2005). AtEBP is regulated by an ethylene signal (B\u00fcttner and Singh, 1997; Ogawa et al., 2005). It"]]
["seedev_train_644", [" between AtEBP and AP2 in ethylene signal transduction have not been investigated in detail.\nHere, we show that AP2 regulates ERF genes such as AtEBP and AtERF1, and the  [CLS] over-expression of AtEBP causes the accumulation of AP2 transcripts [CLS] .\n"]]
["seedev_train_645", [" et al., 1994; Okamuro et al., 1997). Recent reports showed that AP2 controlled seed mass (Jofuku et al., 1994, 2005; Ohto et al., 2005) and that expression of the  [CLS] AP2 protein was translationally regulated by the microRNA mi172 [CLS]  (Aukerman and Sakai, 2003; Chen, 2004). Thus, AP2 may play an important role in both floral and whole-plant development.\nAP2 belongs to the AP2/EREBP family, one of the largest"]]
["seedev_train_646", [" petals, stamens and carpels). According to\nthe \u2018ABC\u2019 model for the determination of floral organ identity, A activity specifies sepals, A and B activities lead to petals,\nB and  [CLS] C activities lead to stamens [CLS] , and C activity specifies carpels (Weigel and Meyerowitz, 1994).\nThe APETALA2 (AP2) gene, which belongs to the A class of genes, exhibits several characteristics distinct from other ABC genes.", "\nthe \u2018ABC\u2019 model for the determination of floral organ identity, A activity specifies sepals, A and B activities lead to petals,\nB and C activities lead to stamens, and  [CLS] C activity specifies carpels [CLS]  (Weigel and Meyerowitz, 1994).\nThe APETALA2 (AP2) gene, which belongs to the A class of genes, exhibits several characteristics distinct from other ABC genes. Although most\nABC genes contain"]]
["seedev_train_647", [" In Arabidopsis, the floral meristem produces four concentric whorls of floral organs (sepals, petals, stamens and carpels). According to\nthe \u2018ABC\u2019 model for the determination of floral organ identity,  [CLS] A activity specifies sepals [CLS] , A and B activities lead to petals,\nB and C activities lead to stamens, and C activity specifies carpels (Weigel and Meyerowitz, 1994).\nThe APETALA2 (AP2) gene, which belongs", " meristem produces four concentric whorls of floral organs (sepals, petals, stamens and carpels). According to\nthe \u2018ABC\u2019 model for the determination of floral organ identity, A activity specifies sepals,  [CLS] A and B activities lead to petals [CLS] ,\nB and C activities lead to stamens, and C activity specifies carpels (Weigel and Meyerowitz, 1994).\nThe APETALA2 (AP2) gene, which belongs to the A class of genes, exhibits"]]
["seedev_train_648", [" et al., 1994, 2005; Ohto et al., 2005) and that expression of the AP2 protein was translationally regulated by the microRNA mi172 (Aukerman and Sakai, 2003; Chen, 2004). Thus,  [CLS] AP2 may play an important role in both floral and whole-plant development [CLS] .\nAP2 belongs to the AP2/EREBP family, one of the largest groups of plant transcriptional factors (Riechmann et al., 2000). It is known that AP2 suppresses expression of AGAMOUS, the", " et al., 1994, 2005; Ohto et al., 2005) and that expression of the AP2 protein was translationally regulated by the microRNA mi172 (Aukerman and Sakai, 2003; Chen, 2004). Thus,  [CLS] AP2 may play an important role in both floral and whole-plant development [CLS] .\nAP2 belongs to the AP2/EREBP family, one of the largest groups of plant transcriptional factors (Riechmann et al., 2000). It is known that AP2 suppresses expression of AGAMOUS, the", " [CLS] AP2 plays a global role not only in floral development [CLS]  but also in the control of seed mass\n(Jofuku et al., 1994, 2005; Okamuro et al., 1997; Ohto et al., 2005). In addition, AP2 expression is controlled transcriptionally and"]]
["seedev_train_649", [" when each transcriptional factor acts\nas a key regulator. In Arabidopsis, the floral meristem produces four concentric whorls of floral organs (sepals, petals, stamens and carpels). According to\nthe \u2018 [CLS] ABC\u2019 model for the determination of floral organ identity [CLS] , A activity specifies sepals, A and B activities lead to petals,\nB and C activities lead to stamens, and C activity specifies carpels (Weigel and Meyerowitz, 1994).\nThe APETALA2"]]
["seedev_train_650", [" organs (sepals, petals, stamens and carpels). According to\nthe \u2018ABC\u2019 model for the determination of floral organ identity, A activity specifies sepals, A and B activities lead to petals,\n [CLS] B and C activities lead to stamens [CLS] , and C activity specifies carpels (Weigel and Meyerowitz, 1994).\nThe APETALA2 (AP2) gene, which belongs to the A class of genes, exhibits several characteristics distinct from other ABC genes.", " four concentric whorls of floral organs (sepals, petals, stamens and carpels). According to\nthe \u2018ABC\u2019 model for the determination of floral organ identity, A activity specifies sepals, A and  [CLS] B activities lead to petals [CLS] ,\nB and C activities lead to stamens, and C activity specifies carpels (Weigel and Meyerowitz, 1994).\nThe APETALA2 (AP2) gene, which belongs to the A class of genes, exhibits"]]
["seedev_train_651", [" [CLS] Arabidopsis, the floral meristem produces four concentric whorls of floral organs (sepals, petals, stamens and carpels [CLS] ). According to\nthe \u2018ABC\u2019 model for the determination of floral organ identity, A activity specifies sepals, A and B activities lead to petals,\nB and C activities lead to"]]
["seedev_train_652", [" several characteristics distinct from other ABC genes. Although most\nABC genes contain a MADS domain, AP2 contains two APETALA2/ethylene-responsive element binding protein (AP2/EREBP) domains (Jofuku et al., 1994). The  [CLS] AP2 transcript is not observed in a region-specific pattern in the four wholes of flower [CLS] , and is detected in other vegetative\ntissues (Jofuku et al., 1994; Okamuro et al., 1997). Recent reports showed that AP2 controlled seed mass (Jofuku et al., 1994, 2005; Ohto", " several characteristics distinct from other ABC genes. Although most\nABC genes contain a MADS domain, AP2 contains two APETALA2/ethylene-responsive element binding protein (AP2/EREBP) domains (Jofuku et al., 1994). The  [CLS] AP2 transcript is not observed in a region-specific pattern in the four wholes of flower, and is detected in other vegetative\ntissues [CLS]  (Jofuku et al., 1994; Okamuro et al., 1997). Recent reports showed that AP2 controlled seed mass (Jofuku et al., 1994, 2005; Ohto et al., 2005) and that expression of"]]
["seedev_train_653", [" [CLS] Arabidopsis, the floral meristem [CLS]  produces four concentric whorls of floral organs (sepals, petals, stamens and carpels). According to\nthe \u2018ABC\u2019 model for the determination of floral organ identity, A activity specifies sepals, A"]]
["seedev_train_654", [" [CLS] Arabidopsis, the floral meristem produces four concentric whorls of floral organs  [CLS] (sepals, petals, stamens and carpels). According to\nthe \u2018ABC\u2019 model for the determination of floral organ identity, A activity specifies sepals, A and B activities lead to petals,\nB and"]]
["seedev_train_655", [" A activity specifies sepals, A and B activities lead to petals,\nB and C activities lead to stamens, and C activity specifies carpels (Weigel and Meyerowitz, 1994).\nThe APETALA2 ( [CLS] AP2) gene, which belongs to the A class of genes [CLS] , exhibits several characteristics distinct from other ABC genes. Although most\nABC genes contain a MADS domain, AP2 contains two APETALA2/ethylene-responsive element binding protein (AP2/EREBP) domains (Jofuku et al., 1994)."]]
["seedev_train_656", [" understood.\nPreviously, we characterized Arabidopsis thaliana ethylene-responsive element binding protein (AtEBP), one of the ERF genes, as a transcriptional activator (Ogawa et al., 2005). AtEBP is regulated by an  [CLS] ethylene signal [CLS]  (B\u00fcttner and Singh, 1997; Ogawa et al., 2005). It was clarified that AtEBP is regulated by EIN2, but not EIN3, suggesting that AtEBP expression is independently regulated under EIN3"]]
["seedev_train_657", [" [CLS] Arabidopsis, the floral meristem produces four concentric whorls of floral organs (sepals [CLS] , petals, stamens and carpels). According to\nthe \u2018ABC\u2019 model for the determination of floral organ identity, A activity specifies sepals, A and B activities lead to petals,\nB and"]]
["seedev_train_658", [" [CLS] Arabidopsis, the floral meristem produces four concentric whorls of floral organs (sepals, petals [CLS] , stamens and carpels). According to\nthe \u2018ABC\u2019 model for the determination of floral organ identity, A activity specifies sepals, A and B activities lead to petals,\nB and C"]]
["seedev_train_659", [" [CLS] Arabidopsis, the floral meristem produces four concentric whorls of floral organs (sepals, petals, stamens [CLS]  and carpels). According to\nthe \u2018ABC\u2019 model for the determination of floral organ identity, A activity specifies sepals, A and B activities lead to petals,\nB and C activities"]]
["seedev_train_660", [" whole-plant development.\nAP2 belongs to the AP2/EREBP family, one of the largest groups of plant transcriptional factors (Riechmann et al., 2000). It is known that AP2 suppresses expression of  [CLS] AGAMOUS, the C [CLS]  gene of a floral homeotic gene (Drews et al., 1991; Bomblies et al., 1999). In addition, AP2 regulates the expression of ethylene-responsive factor (ERF) genes containing one AP2/EREBP domain"]]
["seedev_train_661", [" suppresses expression of AGAMOUS, the C gene of a floral homeotic gene (Drews et al., 1991; Bomblies et al., 1999). In addition, AP2 regulates the expression of ethylene-responsive factor ( [CLS] ERF) genes containing one AP2/EREBP domain [CLS]  (Okamuro et al., 1997). However, the relationship of the transcriptional regulation between AP2 and ERF genes is not fully understood.\nPreviously, we characterized Arabidopsis thaliana ethylene-responsive element binding protein"]]
["seedev_train_662", [" 1994).\nThe APETALA2 (AP2) gene, which belongs to the A class of genes, exhibits several characteristics distinct from other ABC genes. Although most\nABC genes contain a MADS domain,  [CLS] AP2 contains two APETALA2/ethylene-responsive element binding protein (AP2/EREBP) domains [CLS]  (Jofuku et al., 1994). The AP2 transcript is not observed in a region-specific pattern in the four wholes of flower, and is detected in other vegetative\ntissues (Jofuku et"]]
["seedev_train_663", [" regulated by AP2 (Okamuro et al., 1997). Nevertheless, relationships between AtEBP and AP2 in ethylene signal transduction have not been investigated in detail.\nHere, we show that AP2 regulates  [CLS] ERF genes such as AtEBP and AtERF1 [CLS] , and the over-expression of AtEBP causes the accumulation of AP2 transcripts.\n"]]
["seedev_train_664", [" (Okamuro et al., 1997). However, the relationship of the transcriptional regulation between AP2 and ERF genes is not fully understood.\nPreviously, we characterized Arabidopsis thaliana ethylene-responsive element binding protein ( [CLS] AtEBP), one of the ERF [CLS]  genes, as a transcriptional activator (Ogawa et al., 2005). AtEBP is regulated by an ethylene signal (B\u00fcttner and Singh, 1997; Ogawa et al., 2005). It was clarified that AtEBP", " regulated by AP2 (Okamuro et al., 1997). Nevertheless, relationships between AtEBP and AP2 in ethylene signal transduction have not been investigated in detail.\nHere, we show that AP2 regulates  [CLS] ERF genes such as AtEBP [CLS]  and AtERF1, and the over-expression of AtEBP causes the accumulation of AP2 transcripts.\n"]]
["seedev_train_665", [" AtEBP is regulated by an ethylene signal (B\u00fcttner and Singh, 1997; Ogawa et al., 2005). It was clarified that AtEBP is regulated by EIN2, but not EIN3, suggesting that  [CLS] AtEBP expression is independently regulated under EIN3 in ethylene [CLS]  signalling. Interestingly, it was reported that AtEBP expression was regulated by AP2 (Okamuro et al., 1997). Nevertheless, relationships between AtEBP and AP2 in ethylene signal transduction have not been", " Seifert et al., 2004). Furthermore, AtEBP expression is independently regulated under EIN3 in ethylene signalling (Ogawa et al., 2005; this study). In this study, AP2 was not induced by  [CLS] ethylene despite increasing expression of AtEBP [CLS] . We suggest that these signal transductions compete with one another.\nAtEBP knockout plants exhibited a weak floral phenotype with a lower number of stamens. An evaluation was also made", " EIN2 (Binder et al., 2004; Seifert et al., 2004). Furthermore, AtEBP expression is independently regulated under EIN3 in ethylene signalling (Ogawa et al., 2005; this study). In this study,  [CLS] AP2 was not induced by ethylene [CLS]  despite increasing expression of AtEBP. We suggest that these signal transductions compete with one another.\nAtEBP knockout plants exhibited a weak floral phenotype with a lower number of stamens.", " than ein2 mutants (Wang et al., 2002). Previous studies reported that both EIN3-dependent and independent pathways exist downstream of EIN2 (Binder et al., 2004; Seifert et al., 2004). Furthermore,  [CLS] AtEBP expression is independently regulated under EIN3 in ethylene [CLS]  signalling (Ogawa et al., 2005; this study). In this study, AP2 was not induced by ethylene despite increasing expression of AtEBP. We suggest that these signal transductions compete with"]]
["seedev_train_666", [" genes.\nIn addition, over-expression of AtEBP increased the expression level of AP2. AtEBP is a transcriptional activator interacting with GCC-box, an ethylene-responsive element (B\u00fcttner and Singh, 1997). Although the  [CLS] over-expression of AtEBP up-regulated AP2 [CLS]  and AtERF1 expression, these promoters (\u223c2\u00b70\u00a0kb upstream from ATG) did not contain the GCC-box. Interestingly, analysis of tomato ERF\nPti4 interacting with GCC-box revealed that Pti4 bound to promoters", " with previous results showing that AP2 regulates its own AP2 expression (Okamuro et al., 1997; Chen, 2004) as well as other genes, such as the ERF genes.\nIn addition,  [CLS] over-expression of AtEBP increased the expression level of AP2 [CLS] . AtEBP is a transcriptional activator interacting with GCC-box, an ethylene-responsive element (B\u00fcttner and Singh, 1997). Although the over-expression of AtEBP up-regulated AP2 and AtERF1 expression, these promoters (\u223c2\u00b70\u00a0kb upstream", " genes.\nIn addition, over-expression of AtEBP increased the expression level of AP2. AtEBP is a transcriptional activator interacting with GCC-box, an ethylene-responsive element (B\u00fcttner and Singh, 1997). Although the  [CLS] over-expression of AtEBP up-regulated AP2 and AtERF1 [CLS]  expression, these promoters (\u223c2\u00b70\u00a0kb upstream from ATG) did not contain the GCC-box. Interestingly, analysis of tomato ERF\nPti4 interacting with GCC-box revealed that Pti4 bound to promoters in the"]]
["seedev_train_667", [" was observed in ein2-1. The null mutation of EIN2 resulted in a complete loss of responsiveness to ethylene, suggesting that EIN2 is essential in\nthe ethylene signal pathway. However,  [CLS] AP2 expression was not induced by ethylene treatment or in ctr1-1 [CLS] , indicating that EIN2 is a receiver for various signals. It is known that EIN2 receives not only ethylene but also other\nsignals, such as paraquat and jasmonic acid (Alonso"]]
["seedev_train_668", [" was observed in ein2-1. The null mutation of EIN2 resulted in a complete loss of responsiveness to ethylene, suggesting that EIN2 is essential in\nthe ethylene signal pathway. However,  [CLS] AP2 expression was not induced by ethylene treatment [CLS]  or in ctr1-1, indicating that EIN2 is a receiver for various signals. It is known that EIN2 receives not only ethylene but also other\nsignals, such as paraquat and"]]
["seedev_train_669", [" that Pti4 bound to promoters in the absence of GCC-box (Chakravarthy et al., 2003). Like Pti4, transcriptional regulation of the target genes of AtEBP may be complex.\nDown-regulation of  [CLS] AP2 was observed in ein2-1 [CLS] . The null mutation of EIN2 resulted in a complete loss of responsiveness to ethylene, suggesting that EIN2 is essential in\nthe ethylene signal pathway. However, AP2 expression was not"]]
["seedev_train_670", [" 2004) as well as other genes, such as the ERF genes.\nIn addition, over-expression of AtEBP increased the expression level of AP2. AtEBP is a transcriptional activator interacting with  [CLS] GCC-box, an ethylene-responsive element [CLS]  (B\u00fcttner and Singh, 1997). Although the over-expression of AtEBP up-regulated AP2 and AtERF1 expression, these promoters (\u223c2\u00b70\u00a0kb upstream from ATG) did not contain the GCC-box. Interestingly, analysis of tomato"]]
["seedev_train_671", [" mass\n(Jofuku et al., 1994, 2005; Okamuro et al., 1997; Ohto et al., 2005). In addition, AP2 expression is controlled transcriptionally and translationally in a co-ordinated manner. In particular,  [CLS] micro RNAs are thought\nto target mRNAs of AP2 [CLS]  and its homologs, thereby inhibiting the translation process (Aukerman and Sakai, 2003; Chen, 2004). However, the transcriptional regulation of AP2 has not been well understood (Okamuro et al., 1997).", " [CLS] AP2 mRNA is suppressed by micro RNAs [CLS]  (Chen, 2004) and AP2 protein down-regulates AP2 and AtEBP expression (Okamuro et al., 1997; this study), as indicated in grey. In the current study, it was demonstrated that AP2"]]
["seedev_train_672", [" genes of AtEBP may be complex.\nDown-regulation of AP2 was observed in ein2-1. The null mutation of EIN2 resulted in a complete loss of responsiveness to ethylene, suggesting that  [CLS] EIN2 is essential in\nthe ethylene signal pathway [CLS] . However, AP2 expression was not induced by ethylene treatment or in ctr1-1, indicating that EIN2 is a receiver for various signals. It is known that EIN2 receives not only"]]
["seedev_train_673", [" a receiver for various signals. It is known that EIN2 receives not only ethylene but also other\nsignals, such as paraquat and jasmonic acid (Alonso et al., 1999). The  [CLS] N-terminal of EIN2 is thought to be necessary for ethylene responsiveness [CLS] . On the other hand, the C-terminal of EIN2\nis required for transducing the signal to the downstream components (Wang et al., 2002). Our observations suggested that the AP2 expression"]]
["seedev_train_674", [" the absence of GCC-box (Chakravarthy et al., 2003). Like Pti4, transcriptional regulation of the target genes of AtEBP may be complex.\nDown-regulation of AP2 was observed in ein2-1. The  [CLS] null mutation of EIN2 resulted in a complete loss of responsiveness to ethylene [CLS] , suggesting that EIN2 is essential in\nthe ethylene signal pathway. However, AP2 expression was not induced by ethylene treatment or in ctr1-1, indicating that EIN2 is a receiver for"]]
["seedev_train_675", [" and Singh, 1997). Although the over-expression of AtEBP up-regulated AP2 and AtERF1 expression, these promoters (\u223c2\u00b70\u00a0kb upstream from ATG) did not contain the GCC-box. Interestingly, analysis of tomato ERF\n [CLS] Pti4 interacting with GCC-box [CLS]  revealed that Pti4 bound to promoters in the absence of GCC-box (Chakravarthy et al., 2003). Like Pti4, transcriptional regulation of the target genes of AtEBP may be complex.\nDown-regulation"]]
["seedev_train_676", [" AP2 expression (Okamuro et al., 1997; Chen, 2004) as well as other genes, such as the ERF genes.\nIn addition, over-expression of AtEBP increased the expression level of AP2.  [CLS] AtEBP is a transcriptional activator interacting with GCC-box [CLS] , an ethylene-responsive element (B\u00fcttner and Singh, 1997). Although the over-expression of AtEBP up-regulated AP2 and AtERF1 expression, these promoters (\u223c2\u00b70\u00a0kb upstream from ATG) did not contain the GCC-box. Interestingly,", " AP2 expression (Okamuro et al., 1997; Chen, 2004) as well as other genes, such as the ERF genes.\nIn addition, over-expression of AtEBP increased the expression level of AP2.  [CLS] AtEBP is a transcriptional activator interacting with GCC-box, an ethylene-responsive element [CLS]  (B\u00fcttner and Singh, 1997). Although the over-expression of AtEBP up-regulated AP2 and AtERF1 expression, these promoters (\u223c2\u00b70\u00a0kb upstream from ATG) did not contain the GCC-box. Interestingly, analysis of tomato"]]
["seedev_train_677", [" (B\u00fcttner and Singh, 1997). Although the over-expression of AtEBP up-regulated AP2 and AtERF1 expression, these promoters (\u223c2\u00b70\u00a0kb upstream from ATG) did not contain the GCC-box. Interestingly, analysis of tomato  [CLS] ERF\nPti4 [CLS]  interacting with GCC-box revealed that Pti4 bound to promoters in the absence of GCC-box (Chakravarthy et al., 2003). Like Pti4, transcriptional regulation of the target genes of AtEBP may"]]
["seedev_train_678", [" element (B\u00fcttner and Singh, 1997). Although the over-expression of AtEBP up-regulated AP2 and AtERF1 expression, these promoters (\u223c2\u00b70\u00a0kb upstream from ATG) did not contain the GCC-box. Interestingly, analysis of  [CLS] tomato ERF\nPti4 [CLS]  interacting with GCC-box revealed that Pti4 bound to promoters in the absence of GCC-box (Chakravarthy et al., 2003). Like Pti4, transcriptional regulation of the target genes of AtEBP may"]]
["seedev_train_679", [" element (B\u00fcttner and Singh, 1997). Although the over-expression of AtEBP up-regulated AP2 and AtERF1 expression, these promoters (\u223c2\u00b70\u00a0kb upstream from ATG) did not contain the GCC-box. Interestingly, analysis of  [CLS] tomato ERF [CLS] \nPti4 interacting with GCC-box revealed that Pti4 bound to promoters in the absence of GCC-box (Chakravarthy et al., 2003). Like Pti4, transcriptional regulation of the target genes of AtEBP"]]
["seedev_train_680", [" RNAs (Chen, 2004) and AP2 protein down-regulates AP2 and AtEBP expression (Okamuro et al., 1997; this study), as indicated in grey. In the current study, it was demonstrated that  [CLS] AP2 expression was regulated through AtEBP [CLS]  and EIN2, and that AtEBP may contribute to floral development, as indicated by in\nblack.\nThe AP2 mRNA level did not change in the ein3-1 mutant. The position of", " we consider that accumulation of AP2 mRNA in Arabidopsis over-expressing AtEBP is not sufficient to change flower development.\nThis study has shown the mutual relationships between AP2 and AtEBP.  [CLS] AtEBP and functional EIN2 affected the transcriptional regulation of AP2 [CLS] . AtEBP contributed slightly to flower development, especially stamen development. Future reports in this series will focus\non the homeotic role of AtEBP.\n"]]
["seedev_train_681", [" AtEBP knockout plants (Elliott et al., 1996; Klucher et al., 1996). ANT is a member of the AP2/ERF family containing the AP2/EREBP domains.\nOver-expression of AtEBP caused up-regulation of  [CLS] AP2 in leaves [CLS] . Despite the accumulation of AP2 mRNA in transgenic Arabidopsis plants over-expressing AtEBP, no abnormal flowers were observed. Chen (2004) reported that micro RNAs control transcriptional regulation of AP2 expression."]]
["seedev_train_682", [" of AtEBP caused up-regulation of AP2 in leaves. Despite the accumulation of AP2 mRNA in transgenic Arabidopsis plants over-expressing AtEBP, no abnormal flowers were observed. Chen (2004) reported that  [CLS] micro RNAs control transcriptional regulation of AP2 [CLS]  expression. That is, most transgenic Arabidopsis plants over-expressing AP2 had normal flowers and only a fraction exhibited the agamous-like phenotype. However, over-expression of AP2 mutated at the target site"]]
["seedev_train_683", [" the current study, it was demonstrated that AP2 expression was regulated through AtEBP and EIN2, and that AtEBP may contribute to floral development, as indicated by in\nblack.\nThe  [CLS] AP2 mRNA level did not change in the ein3-1 [CLS]  mutant. The position of EIN3 is a branch of the ethylene signalling pathway under EIN2. It is known that the sensitivity\nof ein3 mutants to ethylene is weaker than"]]
["seedev_train_684", [" Klucher et al., 1996). ANT is a member of the AP2/ERF family containing the AP2/EREBP domains.\nOver-expression of AtEBP caused up-regulation of AP2 in leaves. Despite the accumulation of  [CLS] AP2 mRNA in transgenic Arabidopsis plants over-expressing AtEBP [CLS] , no abnormal flowers were observed. Chen (2004) reported that micro RNAs control transcriptional regulation of AP2 expression. That is, most transgenic Arabidopsis plants over-expressing AP2 had normal flowers and"]]
["seedev_train_685", [" demonstrated a more severe floral phenotype. Accumulation of AP2 protein was detected\nonly in transgenic plants over-expressing mutated AP2, not in normal AP2. Thus, we consider that accumulation of  [CLS] AP2 mRNA in Arabidopsis over-expressing AtEBP [CLS]  is not sufficient to change flower development.\nThis study has shown the mutual relationships between AP2 and AtEBP. AtEBP and functional EIN2 affected the transcriptional regulation of AP2. AtEBP"]]
["seedev_train_686", [" et al., 2005; this study). In this study, AP2 was not induced by ethylene despite increasing expression of AtEBP. We suggest that these signal transductions compete with one another.\n [CLS] AtEBP knockout plants exhibited a weak floral phenotype with a lower number of stamens [CLS] . An evaluation was also made of AtERF1 and AP2 expression in AtEBP knockout plants having the same level of WT (data not shown). The ctr1 mutants showed an earlier-maturing"]]
["seedev_train_687", [" Klucher et al., 1996). ANT is a member of the AP2/ERF family containing the AP2/EREBP domains.\nOver-expression of AtEBP caused up-regulation of AP2 in leaves. Despite the accumulation of  [CLS] AP2 mRNA in transgenic Arabidopsis plants over-expressing AtEBP, no abnormal flowers [CLS]  were observed. Chen (2004) reported that micro RNAs control transcriptional regulation of AP2 expression. That is, most transgenic Arabidopsis plants over-expressing AP2 had normal flowers and only a fraction"]]
["seedev_train_688", [" expression (Okamuro et al., 1997; this study), as indicated in grey. In the current study, it was demonstrated that AP2 expression was regulated through AtEBP and EIN2, and that  [CLS] AtEBP may contribute to floral development [CLS] , as indicated by in\nblack.\nThe AP2 mRNA level did not change in the ein3-1 mutant. The position of EIN3 is a branch of the ethylene signalling pathway under", " AtEBP is not sufficient to change flower development.\nThis study has shown the mutual relationships between AP2 and AtEBP. AtEBP and functional EIN2 affected the transcriptional regulation of AP2.  [CLS] AtEBP contributed slightly to flower development [CLS] , especially stamen development. Future reports in this series will focus\non the homeotic role of AtEBP.\n", " AtEBP is not sufficient to change flower development.\nThis study has shown the mutual relationships between AP2 and AtEBP. AtEBP and functional EIN2 affected the transcriptional regulation of AP2.  [CLS] AtEBP contributed slightly to flower development, especially stamen development [CLS] . Future reports in this series will focus\non the homeotic role of AtEBP.\n"]]
["seedev_train_689", [" demonstrated a more severe floral phenotype. Accumulation of AP2 protein was detected\nonly in transgenic plants over-expressing mutated AP2, not in normal AP2. Thus, we consider that accumulation of  [CLS] AP2 mRNA in Arabidopsis over-expressing AtEBP is not sufficient to change flower development [CLS] .\nThis study has shown the mutual relationships between AP2 and AtEBP. AtEBP and functional EIN2 affected the transcriptional regulation of AP2. AtEBP contributed slightly to flower development, especially stamen"]]
["seedev_train_690", [" that micro RNAs control transcriptional regulation of AP2 expression. That is, most transgenic Arabidopsis plants over-expressing AP2 had normal flowers and only a fraction exhibited the agamous-like phenotype. However,  [CLS] over-expression of AP2 mutated at the target site of micro RNAs demonstrated a more severe floral phenotype [CLS] . Accumulation of AP2 protein was detected\nonly in transgenic plants over-expressing mutated AP2, not in normal AP2. Thus, we consider that accumulation of AP2 mRNA in Arabidopsis over-expressing AtEBP"]]
["seedev_train_691", [" expression in AtEBP knockout plants having the same level of WT (data not shown). The ctr1 mutants showed an earlier-maturing phenotype in the gyneocium compared with the flower, and  [CLS] ein mutants affect the maturation of the gyneocium [CLS]  (Kieber et al., 1993). Interestingly, the ant mutants show a similar phenotype to the AtEBP knockout plants (Elliott et al., 1996; Klucher et al., 1996). ANT is a member"]]
["seedev_train_692", [" a lower number of stamens. An evaluation was also made of AtERF1 and AP2 expression in AtEBP knockout plants having the same level of WT (data not shown). The  [CLS] ctr1 mutants showed an earlier-maturing phenotype in the gyneocium [CLS]  compared with the flower, and ein mutants affect the maturation of the gyneocium (Kieber et al., 1993). Interestingly, the ant mutants show a similar phenotype to the AtEBP knockout"]]
["seedev_train_693", [" flowers and only a fraction exhibited the agamous-like phenotype. However, over-expression of AP2 mutated at the target site of micro RNAs demonstrated a more severe floral phenotype. Accumulation of  [CLS] AP2 protein was detected\nonly in transgenic plants over-expressing mutated AP2, not in normal AP2 [CLS] . Thus, we consider that accumulation of AP2 mRNA in Arabidopsis over-expressing AtEBP is not sufficient to change flower development.\nThis study has shown the mutual relationships between AP2 and", " flowers and only a fraction exhibited the agamous-like phenotype. However, over-expression of AP2 mutated at the target site of micro RNAs demonstrated a more severe floral phenotype. Accumulation of  [CLS] AP2 protein was detected\nonly in transgenic plants over-expressing mutated AP2 [CLS] , not in normal AP2. Thus, we consider that accumulation of AP2 mRNA in Arabidopsis over-expressing AtEBP is not sufficient to change flower development.\nThis study has shown the mutual"]]
["seedev_train_694", [" al., 1993). Interestingly, the ant mutants show a similar phenotype to the AtEBP knockout plants (Elliott et al., 1996; Klucher et al., 1996). ANT is a member of the  [CLS] AP2/ERF family containing the AP2/EREBP domains [CLS] .\nOver-expression of AtEBP caused up-regulation of AP2 in leaves. Despite the accumulation of AP2 mRNA in transgenic Arabidopsis plants over-expressing AtEBP, no abnormal flowers were observed. Chen (2004) reported"]]
["seedev_train_695", [" maturation of the gyneocium (Kieber et al., 1993). Interestingly, the ant mutants show a similar phenotype to the AtEBP knockout plants (Elliott et al., 1996; Klucher et al., 1996).  [CLS] ANT is a member of the AP2/ERF family [CLS]  containing the AP2/EREBP domains.\nOver-expression of AtEBP caused up-regulation of AP2 in leaves. Despite the accumulation of AP2 mRNA in transgenic Arabidopsis plants over-expressing AtEBP, no abnormal flowers were"]]
["seedev_train_696", [" Klucher et al., 1996). ANT is a member of the AP2/ERF family containing the AP2/EREBP domains.\nOver-expression of AtEBP caused up-regulation of AP2 in leaves. Despite the accumulation of  [CLS] AP2 mRNA in transgenic Arabidopsis plants over-expressing AtEBP [CLS] , no abnormal flowers were observed. Chen (2004) reported that micro RNAs control transcriptional regulation of AP2 expression. That is, most transgenic Arabidopsis plants over-expressing AP2 had normal flowers and", " demonstrated a more severe floral phenotype. Accumulation of AP2 protein was detected\nonly in transgenic plants over-expressing mutated AP2, not in normal AP2. Thus, we consider that accumulation of  [CLS] AP2 mRNA in Arabidopsis over-expressing AtEBP [CLS]  is not sufficient to change flower development.\nThis study has shown the mutual relationships between AP2 and AtEBP. AtEBP and functional EIN2 affected the transcriptional regulation of AP2. AtEBP"]]
["seedev_train_697", [" show a similar phenotype to the AtEBP knockout plants (Elliott et al., 1996; Klucher et al., 1996). ANT is a member of the AP2/ERF family containing the AP2/EREBP domains.\n [CLS] Over-expression of AtEBP caused up-regulation of AP2 [CLS]  in leaves. Despite the accumulation of AP2 mRNA in transgenic Arabidopsis plants over-expressing AtEBP, no abnormal flowers were observed. Chen (2004) reported that micro RNAs control transcriptional regulation of"]]
["seedev_train_698", [" 1996). ANT is a member of the AP2/ERF family containing the AP2/EREBP domains.\nOver-expression of AtEBP caused up-regulation of AP2 in leaves. Despite the accumulation of AP2 mRNA in  [CLS] transgenic Arabidopsis plants over-expressing AtEBP, no abnormal flowers [CLS]  were observed. Chen (2004) reported that micro RNAs control transcriptional regulation of AP2 expression. That is, most transgenic Arabidopsis plants over-expressing AP2 had normal flowers and only a fraction"]]
["seedev_train_699", [" severe floral phenotype. Accumulation of AP2 protein was detected\nonly in transgenic plants over-expressing mutated AP2, not in normal AP2. Thus, we consider that accumulation of AP2 mRNA in  [CLS] Arabidopsis over-expressing AtEBP is not sufficient to change flower development [CLS] .\nThis study has shown the mutual relationships between AP2 and AtEBP. AtEBP and functional EIN2 affected the transcriptional regulation of AP2. AtEBP contributed slightly to flower development, especially stamen"]]
["seedev_train_700", [" orthologs, HDA19 (At4g38130) and HDA6 (At5g63110), and the Arabidopsis ortholog of SAP18 has recently been shown to interact directly with HDA19 (Song and Galbraith, 2006). We show here that  [CLS] SAP18 is also able to interact with HDA6 [CLS] , and that AGL15 can directly interact with HDA19 (Figure 1). Although the C-domain alone is not sufficient to mediate an interaction between AGL15 and SAP18, it is necessary (Figure\u00a01)."]]
["seedev_train_701", [" is also able to interact with HDA6, and that AGL15 can directly interact with HDA19 (Figure 1). Although the C-domain alone is not sufficient to mediate an interaction between  [CLS] AGL15 and SAP18 [CLS] , it is necessary (Figure\u00a01).\n"]]
["seedev_train_702", [" of the core SIN3/HDAC complex, was recovered as an AGL15-interacting protein. The SIN/HDAC complex generally consists of eight proteins: SIN3, HDAC1, HDAC2, RbAp46, RbAp48, SAP30, SAP18 and SDS3. However,  [CLS] yeast has only one HDAC [CLS] , and lacks the SAP proteins (reviewed by Silverstein and Ekwall, 2005). Arabidopsis has two HDAC1 orthologs, HDA19 (At4g38130) and HDA6 (At5g63110), and the Arabidopsis ortholog of SAP18 has recently"]]
["seedev_train_703", [" of the core SIN3/HDAC complex, was recovered as an AGL15-interacting protein. The SIN/HDAC complex generally consists of eight proteins: SIN3, HDAC1, HDAC2, RbAp46, RbAp48, SAP30, SAP18 and SDS3. However,  [CLS] yeast has only one HDAC, and lacks the SAP proteins [CLS]  (reviewed by Silverstein and Ekwall, 2005). Arabidopsis has two HDAC1 orthologs, HDA19 (At4g38130) and HDA6 (At5g63110), and the Arabidopsis ortholog of SAP18 has recently been shown to interact directly"]]
["seedev_train_704", [" However, yeast has only one HDAC, and lacks the SAP proteins (reviewed by Silverstein and Ekwall, 2005). Arabidopsis has two HDAC1 orthologs, HDA19 (At4g38130) and HDA6 (At5g63110), and the  [CLS] Arabidopsis ortholog of SAP18 has recently been shown to interact directly with HDA19 [CLS]  (Song and Galbraith, 2006). We show here that SAP18 is also able to interact with HDA6, and that AGL15 can directly interact with HDA19 (Figure 1). Although the C-domain", " of SAP18 has recently been shown to interact directly with HDA19 (Song and Galbraith, 2006). We show here that SAP18 is also able to interact with HDA6, and that  [CLS] AGL15 can directly interact with HDA19 [CLS]  (Figure 1). Although the C-domain alone is not sufficient to mediate an interaction between AGL15 and SAP18, it is necessary (Figure\u00a01).\n"]]
["seedev_train_705", [" [CLS] SAP18, a member of the core SIN3/HDAC complex, was recovered as an AGL15 [CLS] -interacting protein. The SIN/HDAC complex generally consists of eight proteins: SIN3, HDAC1, HDAC2, RbAp46, RbAp48, SAP30, SAP18 and SDS3. However, yeast has only one HDAC, and lacks the SAP proteins"]]
["seedev_train_706", [" HDAC2, RbAp46, RbAp48, SAP30, SAP18 and SDS3. However, yeast has only one HDAC, and lacks the SAP proteins (reviewed by Silverstein and Ekwall, 2005). Arabidopsis has two HDAC1 orthologs,  [CLS] HDA19 (At4g38130 [CLS] ) and HDA6 (At5g63110), and the Arabidopsis ortholog of SAP18 has recently been shown to interact directly with HDA19 (Song and Galbraith, 2006). We show here that SAP18 is also"]]
["seedev_train_707", [" SIN3, HDAC1, HDAC2, RbAp46, RbAp48, SAP30, SAP18 and SDS3. However, yeast has only one HDAC, and lacks the SAP proteins (reviewed by Silverstein and Ekwall, 2005). Arabidopsis has two  [CLS] HDAC1 orthologs, HDA19 (At4g38130) and HDA6 [CLS]  (At5g63110), and the Arabidopsis ortholog of SAP18 has recently been shown to interact directly with HDA19 (Song and Galbraith, 2006). We show here that SAP18 is also able to"]]
["seedev_train_708", [" SAP30, SAP18 and SDS3. However, yeast has only one HDAC, and lacks the SAP proteins (reviewed by Silverstein and Ekwall, 2005). Arabidopsis has two HDAC1 orthologs, HDA19 (At4g38130) and  [CLS] HDA6 (At5g63110 [CLS] ), and the Arabidopsis ortholog of SAP18 has recently been shown to interact directly with HDA19 (Song and Galbraith, 2006). We show here that SAP18 is also able to interact"]]
["seedev_train_709", [" SIN3, HDAC1, HDAC2, RbAp46, RbAp48, SAP30, SAP18 and SDS3. However, yeast has only one HDAC, and lacks the SAP proteins (reviewed by Silverstein and Ekwall, 2005). Arabidopsis has two  [CLS] HDAC1 orthologs, HDA19 [CLS]  (At4g38130) and HDA6 (At5g63110), and the Arabidopsis ortholog of SAP18 has recently been shown to interact directly with HDA19 (Song and Galbraith, 2006). We show here that SAP18 is"]]
["seedev_train_710", [" [CLS] SAP18, a member of the core SIN3/HDAC complex, was recovered as an AGL15-interacting protein [CLS] . The SIN/HDAC complex generally consists of eight proteins: SIN3, HDAC1, HDAC2, RbAp46, RbAp48, SAP30, SAP18 and SDS3. However, yeast has only one HDAC, and lacks the SAP proteins (reviewed"]]
["seedev_train_711", [" of eight proteins: SIN3, HDAC1, HDAC2, RbAp46, RbAp48, SAP30, SAP18 and SDS3. However, yeast has only one HDAC, and lacks the SAP proteins (reviewed by Silverstein and Ekwall, 2005).  [CLS] Arabidopsis has two HDAC1 orthologs, HDA19 (At4g38130) and HDA6 [CLS]  (At5g63110), and the Arabidopsis ortholog of SAP18 has recently been shown to interact directly with HDA19 (Song and Galbraith, 2006). We show here that SAP18 is also able to"]]
["seedev_train_712", [" of eight proteins: SIN3, HDAC1, HDAC2, RbAp46, RbAp48, SAP30, SAP18 and SDS3. However, yeast has only one HDAC, and lacks the SAP proteins (reviewed by Silverstein and Ekwall, 2005).  [CLS] Arabidopsis has two HDAC1 orthologs, HDA19 [CLS]  (At4g38130) and HDA6 (At5g63110), and the Arabidopsis ortholog of SAP18 has recently been shown to interact directly with HDA19 (Song and Galbraith, 2006). We show here that SAP18 is"]]
["seedev_train_713", [" of eight proteins: SIN3, HDAC1, HDAC2, RbAp46, RbAp48, SAP30, SAP18 and SDS3. However, yeast has only one HDAC, and lacks the SAP proteins (reviewed by Silverstein and Ekwall, 2005).  [CLS] Arabidopsis has two HDAC1 [CLS]  orthologs, HDA19 (At4g38130) and HDA6 (At5g63110), and the Arabidopsis ortholog of SAP18 has recently been shown to interact directly with HDA19 (Song and Galbraith, 2006). We show here that"]]
["seedev_train_714", [" with SIN3/HDAC1 members, giving the complex an activator function, have also been reported. In the literature HDACs are generally associated with the repression of gene expression; however, in plants  [CLS] HDA19 has been shown to interact with bnKCP [CLS] , and exerts a modest transactivation of reporter genes (Gao et\u00a0al., 2003). HDA19 has also been shown to interact with BnSCL1, an ortholog of the Arabidopsis SCARECROW-like protein\u00a015 (SCL15), and", " associated with the repression of gene expression; however, in plants HDA19 has been shown to interact with bnKCP, and exerts a modest transactivation of reporter genes (Gao et\u00a0al., 2003).  [CLS] HDA19 has also been shown to interact with BnSCL1 [CLS] , an ortholog of the Arabidopsis SCARECROW-like protein\u00a015 (SCL15), and likewise exerts transcriptional activation of reporter genes (Gao et\u00a0al., 2004).\n"]]
["seedev_train_715", [" In the transient expression assay, when the effector lacked any portion of the C-terminal domain, the GUS/LUC reporter ratio was no different than the no-effector control, but forms of  [CLS] AGL15 that included part of the C-terminal domain [CLS]  often, but not always, showed activation of the GUS reporter gene. These effectors (deletions\u00a0A and B) included a conserved region (LENETLNRRQxxELR). but not the LxLxL motif. The LENETLNRRQxxELR motif"]]
["seedev_train_716", [" shown to interact with bnKCP, and exerts a modest transactivation of reporter genes (Gao et\u00a0al., 2003). HDA19 has also been shown to interact with BnSCL1, an ortholog of the  [CLS] Arabidopsis SCARECROW-like protein\u00a015 [CLS]  (SCL15), and likewise exerts transcriptional activation of reporter genes (Gao et\u00a0al., 2004).\n"]]
["seedev_train_717", [" both of which have reported transactivation functions (Cho et\u00a0al., 1999; Honma and Goto, 2001; Ng and Yanofsky, 2001; Pelaz et\u00a0al., 2001). It is interesting to note that the conserved  [CLS] LENETLNRRQxxE motif resides within a region of AGL15 [CLS]  that is necessary and sufficient to allow interaction with SEP3 in yeast (data not shown).\nThere are numerous examples in the literature of protein interactions determining whether a protein"]]
["seedev_train_718", [" activation of direct AGL15 downstream targets (Wang et\u00a0al., 2002, 2004; S. Perry, unpublished data) may be mediated via its association with transcriptional activators. Yeast two-hybrid studies have demonstrated that  [CLS] AGL15 can interact with AP1 [CLS]  (de Folter et\u00a0al., 2005) and SEP3 (Figure 4), both of which have reported transactivation functions (Cho et\u00a0al., 1999; Honma and Goto, 2001; Ng and Yanofsky, 2001; Pelaz et\u00a0al., 2001).", " activation of direct AGL15 downstream targets (Wang et\u00a0al., 2002, 2004; S. Perry, unpublished data) may be mediated via its association with transcriptional activators. Yeast two-hybrid studies have demonstrated that  [CLS] AGL15 can interact with AP1 (de Folter et\u00a0al., 2005) and SEP3 [CLS]  (Figure 4), both of which have reported transactivation functions (Cho et\u00a0al., 1999; Honma and Goto, 2001; Ng and Yanofsky, 2001; Pelaz et\u00a0al., 2001). It is interesting to note that", " (Cho et\u00a0al., 1999; Honma and Goto, 2001; Ng and Yanofsky, 2001; Pelaz et\u00a0al., 2001). It is interesting to note that the conserved LENETLNRRQxxE motif resides within a region of  [CLS] AGL15 that is necessary and sufficient to allow interaction with SEP3 [CLS]  in yeast (data not shown).\nThere are numerous examples in the literature of protein interactions determining whether a protein acts as a transcriptional activator or repressor. Known transcriptional activators", " [CLS] AGL15 binds directly to and represses LEA76 [CLS] , CBF2 and AGL18 in\u00a0planta\nIt is becoming increasingly apparent that autoregulatory loops are a common phenomenon in the regulation of MADS-box genes in plants (G\u00f3mez-Mena et\u00a0al., 2005; Honma and", " [CLS] AGL15 binds directly to and represses LEA76, CBF2 and AGL18 [CLS]  in\u00a0planta\nIt is becoming increasingly apparent that autoregulatory loops are a common phenomenon in the regulation of MADS-box genes in plants (G\u00f3mez-Mena et\u00a0al., 2005; Honma and Goto, 2000; Zhu", " [CLS] AGL15 binds directly to and represses LEA76, CBF2 [CLS]  and AGL18 in\u00a0planta\nIt is becoming increasingly apparent that autoregulatory loops are a common phenomenon in the regulation of MADS-box genes in plants (G\u00f3mez-Mena et\u00a0al., 2005; Honma and Goto,"]]
["seedev_train_719", [" expression of some direct downstream target genes, and represses the expression others\nDownstream target genes of AGL15 have previously been identified of which expression is induced in response to  [CLS] AGL15 binding a CArG motif [CLS]  within the promoter region (Wang et\u00a0al., 2002, 2004). In the transient expression assay, when the effector lacked any portion of the C-terminal domain, the GUS/LUC reporter ratio was no"]]
["seedev_train_720", [" in plants HDA19 has been shown to interact with bnKCP, and exerts a modest transactivation of reporter genes (Gao et\u00a0al., 2003). HDA19 has also been shown to interact with  [CLS] BnSCL1, an ortholog of the Arabidopsis SCARECROW-like protein\u00a015 (SCL15 [CLS] ), and likewise exerts transcriptional activation of reporter genes (Gao et\u00a0al., 2004).\n", " to interact with bnKCP, and exerts a modest transactivation of reporter genes (Gao et\u00a0al., 2003). HDA19 has also been shown to interact with BnSCL1, an ortholog of the Arabidopsis  [CLS] SCARECROW-like protein\u00a015 (SCL15 [CLS] ), and likewise exerts transcriptional activation of reporter genes (Gao et\u00a0al., 2004).\n"]]
["seedev_train_721", [" 2001; Pelaz et\u00a0al., 2001). It is interesting to note that the conserved LENETLNRRQxxE motif resides within a region of AGL15 that is necessary and sufficient to allow interaction with  [CLS] SEP3 in yeast [CLS]  (data not shown).\nThere are numerous examples in the literature of protein interactions determining whether a protein acts as a transcriptional activator or repressor. Known transcriptional activators have been"]]
["seedev_train_722", [" activation domain (Titz et\u00a0al., 2006). Alternately, activation of direct AGL15 downstream targets (Wang et\u00a0al., 2002, 2004; S. Perry, unpublished data) may be mediated via its association with transcriptional activators.  [CLS] Yeast two-hybrid studies have demonstrated that AGL15 [CLS]  can interact with AP1 (de Folter et\u00a0al., 2005) and SEP3 (Figure 4), both of which have reported transactivation functions (Cho et\u00a0al., 1999; Honma and Goto, 2001; Ng and Yanofsky,", " activation domain (Titz et\u00a0al., 2006). Alternately, activation of direct AGL15 downstream targets (Wang et\u00a0al., 2002, 2004; S. Perry, unpublished data) may be mediated via its association with transcriptional activators.  [CLS] Yeast two-hybrid studies have demonstrated that AGL15 can interact with AP1 [CLS]  (de Folter et\u00a0al., 2005) and SEP3 (Figure 4), both of which have reported transactivation functions (Cho et\u00a0al., 1999; Honma and Goto, 2001; Ng and Yanofsky, 2001; Pelaz et\u00a0al., 2001).", " activation domain (Titz et\u00a0al., 2006). Alternately, activation of direct AGL15 downstream targets (Wang et\u00a0al., 2002, 2004; S. Perry, unpublished data) may be mediated via its association with transcriptional activators.  [CLS] Yeast two-hybrid studies have demonstrated that AGL15 can interact with AP1 (de Folter et\u00a0al., 2005) and SEP3 [CLS]  (Figure 4), both of which have reported transactivation functions (Cho et\u00a0al., 1999; Honma and Goto, 2001; Ng and Yanofsky, 2001; Pelaz et\u00a0al., 2001). It is interesting to note that"]]
["seedev_train_723", [" interact with SIN3/HDAC1 members, giving the complex an activator function, have also been reported. In the literature HDACs are generally associated with the repression of gene expression; however, in  [CLS] plants HDA19 [CLS]  has been shown to interact with bnKCP, and exerts a modest transactivation of reporter genes (Gao et\u00a0al., 2003). HDA19 has also been shown to interact with BnSCL1, an ortholog"]]
["seedev_train_724", [" interact with SIN3/HDAC1 members, giving the complex an activator function, have also been reported. In the literature HDACs are generally associated with the repression of gene expression; however, in  [CLS] plants HDA19 has been shown to interact with bnKCP [CLS] , and exerts a modest transactivation of reporter genes (Gao et\u00a0al., 2003). HDA19 has also been shown to interact with BnSCL1, an ortholog of the Arabidopsis SCARECROW-like protein\u00a015 (SCL15), and"]]
["seedev_train_725", [" AGL18 might be subsequently repressing CBF2 and LEA76, and thus masking to some degree AGL15-VP16-mediated transcription, although an increase in response to AGL15-VP16 is still apparent.\nEctopic expression of  [CLS] SAP18 alone repressed LEA and CBF2 (Figure 5a), possibly through interaction with AGL15 [CLS]  that is expressed in non-transgenic seedlings or through interaction with other DNA-binding proteins. However, AGL15 and AGL18 levels were unaffected by ectopic expression of SAP18 alone, possibly indicating a"]]
["seedev_train_726", [" result from genetic redundancy with other MADS expressed in the seedling but not present in the seed. There are numerous examples of genetic redundancy and complex regulatory interactions among  [CLS] plant MADS-box genes [CLS]  (for a review, see Gutierrez-Cortines and Davies, 2000). However, CBF2 is repressed, although not as drastically as in seeds, in seedlings constitutively expressing AGL15 relative to wild-type plants, and"]]
["seedev_train_727", [" in agl15 plants, and, conversely, a decrease in response to increased AGL15 levels in all tissues tested. In contrast to what was observed in seeds, no noticeable difference in  [CLS] CBF2 transcript between agl15-2 and Ws seedlings [CLS]  was observed, which could be result from genetic redundancy with other MADS expressed in the seedling but not present in the seed. There are numerous examples of genetic redundancy"]]
["seedev_train_728", [" [CLS] regulation of MADS-box genes in plants [CLS]  (G\u00f3mez-Mena et\u00a0al., 2005; Honma and Goto, 2000; Zhu and Perry, 2005). We previously reported that AGL15 represses AGL15 transcription (Zhu and Perry, 2005). AGL15 can also directly associate with"]]
["seedev_train_729", [" [CLS] AGL15 binds directly to and represses LEA76, CBF2 and AGL18 [CLS]  in\u00a0planta\nIt is becoming increasingly apparent that autoregulatory loops are a common phenomenon in the regulation of MADS-box genes in plants (G\u00f3mez-Mena et\u00a0al., 2005; Honma and Goto, 2000; Zhu", " [CLS] AGL15 binds directly to and represses LEA76, CBF2 [CLS]  and AGL18 in\u00a0planta\nIt is becoming increasingly apparent that autoregulatory loops are a common phenomenon in the regulation of MADS-box genes in plants (G\u00f3mez-Mena et\u00a0al., 2005; Honma and Goto,", " [CLS] AGL15 binds directly to and represses LEA76 [CLS] , CBF2 and AGL18 in\u00a0planta\nIt is becoming increasingly apparent that autoregulatory loops are a common phenomenon in the regulation of MADS-box genes in plants (G\u00f3mez-Mena et\u00a0al., 2005; Honma and"]]
["seedev_train_730", [" not present in the seed. There are numerous examples of genetic redundancy and complex regulatory interactions among plant MADS-box genes (for a review, see Gutierrez-Cortines and Davies, 2000). However,  [CLS] CBF2 is repressed, although not as drastically as in seeds, in seedlings constitutively expressing AGL15 relative to wild-type plants, and is induced in seedlings accumulating the AGL15-VP16 [CLS]  fusion protein (Figure 5a). In support of this observation, we have performed crosses between plants carrying a GUS reporter gene under the control of the CBF2 promoter (Fowler et\u00a0al.,"]]
["seedev_train_731", [" represses AGL15 transcription (Zhu and Perry, 2005). AGL15 can also directly associate with regulatory regions of AGL18 and repress accumulation of AGL18 transcript (Figure 5a,b). No noticeable increase in  [CLS] AGL18 transcription has been observed in plants homozygous for null alleles of AGL15 [CLS]  (Figure 5b) or vice versa (unpublished data), but given that AGL15 is able to repress its own transcription (Zhu and Perry, 2005), and the close similarity and redundancy between"]]
["seedev_train_732", [" demonstrated that AGL15 and AGL18 perform at least partially redundant functions (Adamczyk et\u00a0al., 2007, S. Perry, unpublished data), and given that AGL15-VP16 induces accumulation of AGL18 transcript (Figure 5a),  [CLS] AGL18 might be subsequently repressing CBF2 and LEA76 [CLS] , and thus masking to some degree AGL15-VP16-mediated transcription, although an increase in response to AGL15-VP16 is still apparent.\nEctopic expression of SAP18 alone repressed LEA and CBF2 (Figure 5a),", " demonstrated that AGL15 and AGL18 perform at least partially redundant functions (Adamczyk et\u00a0al., 2007, S. Perry, unpublished data), and given that AGL15-VP16 induces accumulation of AGL18 transcript (Figure 5a),  [CLS] AGL18 might be subsequently repressing CBF2 [CLS]  and LEA76, and thus masking to some degree AGL15-VP16-mediated transcription, although an increase in response to AGL15-VP16 is still apparent.\nEctopic expression of SAP18 alone repressed LEA and CBF2"]]
["seedev_train_733", [" The latter showed stronger GUS staining throughout the entire seedling, whereas the former appeared to have less GUS activity relative to the uncrossed pCBF2:GUS control (K. Hill, unpublished data).\n [CLS] LEA76, CBF2 (Figure 5a) and other putative AGL15 downstream target genes (K. Hill, H. Wang and S.E. Perry, unpublished data), are not as highly induced by ectopic expression of AGL15-VP16 [CLS]  as expected, especially when compared with levels of AGL18 transcript accumulation brought about by AGL15-VP16 (Figure 5a). It has been demonstrated that AGL15 and AGL18 perform at least partially", " latter showed stronger GUS staining throughout the entire seedling, whereas the former appeared to have less GUS activity relative to the uncrossed pCBF2:GUS control (K. Hill, unpublished data).\nLEA76,  [CLS] CBF2 (Figure 5a) and other putative AGL15 downstream target genes (K. Hill, H. Wang and S.E. Perry, unpublished data), are not as highly induced by ectopic expression of AGL15-VP16 [CLS]  as expected, especially when compared with levels of AGL18 transcript accumulation brought about by AGL15-VP16 (Figure 5a). It has been demonstrated that AGL15 and AGL18 perform at least partially"]]
["seedev_train_734", [" transcript (Figure 5a), AGL18 might be subsequently repressing CBF2 and LEA76, and thus masking to some degree AGL15-VP16-mediated transcription, although an increase in response to AGL15-VP16 is still apparent.\n [CLS] Ectopic expression of SAP18 alone repressed LEA and CBF2 [CLS]  (Figure 5a), possibly through interaction with AGL15 that is expressed in non-transgenic seedlings or through interaction with other DNA-binding proteins. However, AGL15 and AGL18 levels were unaffected by ectopic"]]
["seedev_train_735", [" not present in the seed. There are numerous examples of genetic redundancy and complex regulatory interactions among plant MADS-box genes (for a review, see Gutierrez-Cortines and Davies, 2000). However,  [CLS] CBF2 is repressed, although not as drastically as in seeds, in seedlings constitutively expressing AGL15 [CLS]  relative to wild-type plants, and is induced in seedlings accumulating the AGL15-VP16 fusion protein (Figure 5a). In support of this observation, we have performed crosses between plants carrying a"]]
["seedev_train_736", [" not present in the seed. There are numerous examples of genetic redundancy and complex regulatory interactions among plant MADS-box genes (for a review, see Gutierrez-Cortines and Davies, 2000). However,  [CLS] CBF2 is repressed, although not as drastically as in seeds [CLS] , in seedlings constitutively expressing AGL15 relative to wild-type plants, and is induced in seedlings accumulating the AGL15-VP16 fusion protein (Figure 5a). In support of this observation, we have performed"]]
["seedev_train_737", [" to LEA76 (At1g52690) (Figure 6a), and that LEA76 is repressed by AGL15 and/or SAP18 in a variety of tissues, including seedlings (Figure 5). Published results support a role for  [CLS] SIN3/HDAC1-mediated repression in regulation of LEA76 [CLS] : trichostatin\u00a0A, a specific inhibitor of HDAC, causes an increase in LEA76 transcript during seed germination (Tai et\u00a0al., 2005).\n"]]
["seedev_train_738", [" SAP18 alone repressed LEA and CBF2 (Figure 5a), possibly through interaction with AGL15 that is expressed in non-transgenic seedlings or through interaction with other DNA-binding proteins. However, AGL15 and  [CLS] AGL18 levels were unaffected by ectopic expression of SAP18 [CLS]  alone, possibly indicating a more specific interaction at these loci. We have demonstrated that AGL15 binds to LEA76 (At1g52690) (Figure 6a), and that LEA76 is repressed by AGL15 and/or", " expression of SAP18 alone repressed LEA and CBF2 (Figure 5a), possibly through interaction with AGL15 that is expressed in non-transgenic seedlings or through interaction with other DNA-binding proteins. However,  [CLS] AGL15 and AGL18 levels were unaffected by ectopic expression of SAP18 [CLS]  alone, possibly indicating a more specific interaction at these loci. We have demonstrated that AGL15 binds to LEA76 (At1g52690) (Figure 6a), and that LEA76 is repressed by AGL15 and/or"]]
["seedev_train_739", [" unaffected by ectopic expression of SAP18 alone, possibly indicating a more specific interaction at these loci. We have demonstrated that AGL15 binds to LEA76 (At1g52690) (Figure 6a), and that  [CLS] LEA76 is repressed by AGL15 and/or SAP18 [CLS]  in a variety of tissues, including seedlings (Figure 5). Published results support a role for SIN3/HDAC1-mediated repression in regulation of LEA76: trichostatin\u00a0A, a specific inhibitor of HDAC, causes an"]]
["seedev_train_740", [" transcript (Figure 5a), AGL18 might be subsequently repressing CBF2 and LEA76, and thus masking to some degree AGL15-VP16-mediated transcription, although an increase in response to AGL15-VP16 is still apparent.\n [CLS] Ectopic expression of SAP18 alone repressed LEA [CLS]  and CBF2 (Figure 5a), possibly through interaction with AGL15 that is expressed in non-transgenic seedlings or through interaction with other DNA-binding proteins. However, AGL15 and AGL18 levels were unaffected"]]
["seedev_train_741", [" other DNA-binding proteins. However, AGL15 and AGL18 levels were unaffected by ectopic expression of SAP18 alone, possibly indicating a more specific interaction at these loci. We have demonstrated that  [CLS] AGL15 binds to LEA76 [CLS]  (At1g52690) (Figure 6a), and that LEA76 is repressed by AGL15 and/or SAP18 in a variety of tissues, including seedlings (Figure 5). Published results support a role for SIN3/HDAC1-mediated repression"]]
["seedev_train_742", [" However, AGL15 and AGL18 levels were unaffected by ectopic expression of SAP18 alone, possibly indicating a more specific interaction at these loci. We have demonstrated that AGL15 binds to  [CLS] LEA76 (At1g52690 [CLS] ) (Figure 6a), and that LEA76 is repressed by AGL15 and/or SAP18 in a variety of tissues, including seedlings (Figure 5). Published results support a role for SIN3/HDAC1-mediated repression in"]]
["seedev_train_743", [" masked by a subsequent autorepression or higher levels of redundancy involving other MADS-domain proteins.\nAGL15 binds the promoter of LEA76 and represses its transcription. There is an increase in  [CLS] LEA76 transcript accumulation in agl15 [CLS]  plants, and, conversely, a decrease in response to increased AGL15 levels in all tissues tested. In contrast to what was observed in seeds, no noticeable difference in CBF2 transcript"]]
["seedev_train_744", [" target genes (K. Hill, H. Wang and S.E. Perry, unpublished data), are not as highly induced by ectopic expression of AGL15-VP16 as expected, especially when compared with levels of  [CLS] AGL18 transcript accumulation brought about by AGL15-VP16 [CLS]  (Figure 5a). It has been demonstrated that AGL15 and AGL18 perform at least partially redundant functions (Adamczyk et\u00a0al., 2007, S. Perry, unpublished data), and given that AGL15-VP16 induces accumulation", " about by AGL15-VP16 (Figure 5a). It has been demonstrated that AGL15 and AGL18 perform at least partially redundant functions (Adamczyk et\u00a0al., 2007, S. Perry, unpublished data), and given that  [CLS] AGL15-VP16 induces accumulation of AGL18 transcript [CLS]  (Figure 5a), AGL18 might be subsequently repressing CBF2 and LEA76, and thus masking to some degree AGL15-VP16-mediated transcription, although an increase in response to AGL15-VP16 is still apparent.\nEctopic"]]
["seedev_train_745", [" regulation of MADS-box genes in plants (G\u00f3mez-Mena et\u00a0al., 2005; Honma and Goto, 2000; Zhu and Perry, 2005). We previously reported that AGL15 represses AGL15 transcription (Zhu and Perry, 2005).  [CLS] AGL15 can also directly associate with regulatory regions of AGL18 and repress accumulation of AGL18 transcript [CLS]  (Figure 5a,b). No noticeable increase in AGL18 transcription has been observed in plants homozygous for null alleles of AGL15 (Figure 5b) or vice versa (unpublished data), but given that", " masked by a subsequent autorepression or higher levels of redundancy involving other MADS-domain proteins.\nAGL15 binds the promoter of LEA76 and represses its transcription. There is an increase in  [CLS] LEA76 transcript accumulation in agl15 plants, and, conversely, a decrease in response to increased AGL15 [CLS]  levels in all tissues tested. In contrast to what was observed in seeds, no noticeable difference in CBF2 transcript between agl15-2 and Ws seedlings was observed, which could be"]]
["seedev_train_746", [" that LEA76 is repressed by AGL15 and/or SAP18 in a variety of tissues, including seedlings (Figure 5). Published results support a role for SIN3/HDAC1-mediated repression in regulation of LEA76:  [CLS] trichostatin\u00a0A, a specific inhibitor of HDAC, causes an increase in LEA76 transcript [CLS]  during seed germination (Tai et\u00a0al., 2005).\n"]]
["seedev_train_747", [" in agl15 plants, and, conversely, a decrease in response to increased AGL15 levels in all tissues tested. In contrast to what was observed in seeds, no noticeable difference in  [CLS] CBF2 transcript between agl15-2 [CLS]  and Ws seedlings was observed, which could be result from genetic redundancy with other MADS expressed in the seedling but not present in the seed. There are numerous examples", " in agl15 plants, and, conversely, a decrease in response to increased AGL15 levels in all tissues tested. In contrast to what was observed in seeds, no noticeable difference in  [CLS] CBF2 transcript between agl15-2 and Ws [CLS]  seedlings was observed, which could be result from genetic redundancy with other MADS expressed in the seedling but not present in the seed. There are numerous examples of genetic"]]
["seedev_train_748", [" [CLS] LEA76, CBF2 and AGL18 in\u00a0planta [CLS] \nIt is becoming increasingly apparent that autoregulatory loops are a common phenomenon in the regulation of MADS-box genes in plants (G\u00f3mez-Mena et\u00a0al., 2005; Honma and Goto, 2000; Zhu and"]]
["seedev_train_749", [" [CLS] AGL18 in\u00a0planta [CLS] \nIt is becoming increasingly apparent that autoregulatory loops are a common phenomenon in the regulation of MADS-box genes in plants (G\u00f3mez-Mena et\u00a0al., 2005; Honma and Goto, 2000; Zhu and"]]
["seedev_train_750", [" [CLS] CBF2 and AGL18 in\u00a0planta [CLS] \nIt is becoming increasingly apparent that autoregulatory loops are a common phenomenon in the regulation of MADS-box genes in plants (G\u00f3mez-Mena et\u00a0al., 2005; Honma and Goto, 2000; Zhu and"]]
["seedev_train_751", [" Hill, unpublished data).\nLEA76, CBF2 (Figure 5a) and other putative AGL15 downstream target genes (K. Hill, H. Wang and S.E. Perry, unpublished data), are not as highly induced by  [CLS] ectopic expression of AGL15-VP16 as expected, especially when compared with levels of AGL18 transcript accumulation brought about by AGL15-VP16 [CLS]  (Figure 5a). It has been demonstrated that AGL15 and AGL18 perform at least partially redundant functions (Adamczyk et\u00a0al., 2007, S. Perry, unpublished data), and given that AGL15-VP16 induces accumulation"]]
["seedev_train_752", [" alone, possibly indicating a more specific interaction at these loci. We have demonstrated that AGL15 binds to LEA76 (At1g52690) (Figure 6a), and that LEA76 is repressed by AGL15 and/or  [CLS] SAP18 in a variety of tissues, including seedlings [CLS]  (Figure 5). Published results support a role for SIN3/HDAC1-mediated repression in regulation of LEA76: trichostatin\u00a0A, a specific inhibitor of HDAC, causes an increase in LEA76 transcript during seed germination"]]
["seedev_train_753", [" [CLS] AGL18 in\u00a0planta [CLS] \nIt is becoming increasingly apparent that autoregulatory loops are a common phenomenon in the regulation of MADS-box genes in plants (G\u00f3mez-Mena et\u00a0al., 2005; Honma and Goto, 2000; Zhu and", " [CLS] CBF2 and AGL18 in\u00a0planta [CLS] \nIt is becoming increasingly apparent that autoregulatory loops are a common phenomenon in the regulation of MADS-box genes in plants (G\u00f3mez-Mena et\u00a0al., 2005; Honma and Goto, 2000; Zhu and", " [CLS] LEA76, CBF2 and AGL18 in\u00a0planta [CLS] \nIt is becoming increasingly apparent that autoregulatory loops are a common phenomenon in the regulation of MADS-box genes in plants (G\u00f3mez-Mena et\u00a0al., 2005; Honma and Goto, 2000; Zhu and"]]
["seedev_train_754", [" not present in the seed. There are numerous examples of genetic redundancy and complex regulatory interactions among plant MADS-box genes (for a review, see Gutierrez-Cortines and Davies, 2000). However,  [CLS] CBF2 is repressed, although not as drastically as in seeds, in seedlings constitutively expressing AGL15 relative to wild-type [CLS]  plants, and is induced in seedlings accumulating the AGL15-VP16 fusion protein (Figure 5a). In support of this observation, we have performed crosses between plants carrying a GUS reporter gene", " the timing of the different components of the\nprogram seems to be unaffected. In particular, we still see accumulation of chlorophyll preceding the expression of the seed\nstorage protein  [CLS] At2S3, as in wild-type [CLS]  embryos. It is tempting to speculate that miRNAs regulate the initiation, but not the progression, of maturation.\n"]]
["seedev_train_755", [" Hill, unpublished data).\nLEA76, CBF2 (Figure 5a) and other putative AGL15 downstream target genes (K. Hill, H. Wang and S.E. Perry, unpublished data), are not as highly induced by  [CLS] ectopic expression of AGL15-VP16 as expected, especially when compared with levels of AGL18 transcript [CLS]  accumulation brought about by AGL15-VP16 (Figure 5a). It has been demonstrated that AGL15 and AGL18 perform at least partially redundant functions (Adamczyk et\u00a0al., 2007, S. Perry, unpublished data), and"]]
["seedev_train_756", [" variety of tissues, including seedlings (Figure 5). Published results support a role for SIN3/HDAC1-mediated repression in regulation of LEA76: trichostatin\u00a0A, a specific inhibitor of HDAC, causes an increase in  [CLS] LEA76 transcript during seed germination [CLS]  (Tai et\u00a0al., 2005).\n"]]
["seedev_train_757", [" of its target genes. Gain- and loss-of-function approaches indicate\na correlation between the amount of bZIP53 protein and MAT gene expression. Specific in vivo and in vitro binding of  [CLS] bZIP53\nprotein to a G-box [CLS]  element in the albumin 2S2 promoter is demonstrated. Importantly, heterodimerization with bZIP10 or bZIP25, previously described bZIP regulators of\nMAT gene expression, significantly enhances DNA binding activity and produces"]]
["seedev_train_758", [" correlated with the ratio of the correspondent bZIP heterodimerization partners.\nWhereas bZIP53 does not interact with ABI3, a crucial transcriptional regulator in Arabidopsis seeds, ternary complex formation between the  [CLS] bZIP heterodimers and ABI3 [CLS]  increases the expression of MAT genes in planta.\nWe therefore propose that heterodimers containing bZIP53 participate in enhanceosome formation to produce a dramatic increase\nin MAT gene transcription.\n"]]
["seedev_train_759", [" of its target genes. Gain- and loss-of-function approaches indicate\na correlation between the amount of bZIP53 protein and MAT gene expression. Specific in vivo and in vitro binding of  [CLS] bZIP53\nprotein to a G-box element in the albumin 2S2 promoter is demonstrated. Importantly, heterodimerization with bZIP10 [CLS]  or bZIP25, previously described bZIP regulators of\nMAT gene expression, significantly enhances DNA binding activity and produces a synergistic increase in target gene activation.\nFull-level target gene activation is"]]
["seedev_train_760", [" of its target genes. Gain- and loss-of-function approaches indicate\na correlation between the amount of bZIP53 protein and MAT gene expression. Specific in vivo and in vitro binding of  [CLS] bZIP53\nprotein to a G-box element in the albumin 2S2 promoter is demonstrated. Importantly, heterodimerization with bZIP10 or bZIP25 [CLS] , previously described bZIP regulators of\nMAT gene expression, significantly enhances DNA binding activity and produces a synergistic increase in target gene activation.\nFull-level target gene activation is strongly correlated"]]
["seedev_train_761", [" DNA binding activity and produces a synergistic increase in target gene activation.\nFull-level target gene activation is strongly correlated with the ratio of the correspondent bZIP heterodimerization partners.\nWhereas  [CLS] bZIP53 does not interact with ABI3 [CLS] , a crucial transcriptional regulator in Arabidopsis seeds, ternary complex formation between the bZIP heterodimers and ABI3 increases the expression of MAT genes in planta.\nWe therefore propose that heterodimers"]]
["seedev_train_762", [" several transcription factor families, such as basic leucine zippers\n(bZIPs), B3s, MYBs, and DOFs. In this work, we identify Arabidopsis bZIP53 as a novel transcriptional regulator of MAT genes.  [CLS] bZIP53 expression in developing seeds [CLS]  precedes and overlaps that of its target genes. Gain- and loss-of-function approaches indicate\na correlation between the amount of bZIP53 protein and MAT gene expression. Specific in vivo and"]]
["seedev_train_763", [" Gain- and loss-of-function approaches indicate\na correlation between the amount of bZIP53 protein and MAT gene expression. Specific in vivo and in vitro binding of bZIP53\nprotein to a  [CLS] G-box element in the albumin 2S2 promoter [CLS]  is demonstrated. Importantly, heterodimerization with bZIP10 or bZIP25, previously described bZIP regulators of\nMAT gene expression, significantly enhances DNA binding activity and produces a synergistic increase in target gene"]]
["seedev_train_764", [" [CLS] basic leucine zippers\n(bZIPs [CLS] ), B3s, MYBs, and DOFs. In this work, we identify Arabidopsis bZIP53 as a novel transcriptional regulator of MAT genes. bZIP53 expression in developing seeds precedes and overlaps that of"]]
["seedev_train_765", [" protein and MAT gene expression. Specific in vivo and in vitro binding of bZIP53\nprotein to a G-box element in the albumin 2S2 promoter is demonstrated. Importantly, heterodimerization with  [CLS] bZIP10 or bZIP25, previously described bZIP [CLS]  regulators of\nMAT gene expression, significantly enhances DNA binding activity and produces a synergistic increase in target gene activation.\nFull-level target gene activation is strongly correlated with the ratio"]]
["seedev_train_766", [" MAT gene expression. Specific in vivo and in vitro binding of bZIP53\nprotein to a G-box element in the albumin 2S2 promoter is demonstrated. Importantly, heterodimerization with bZIP10 or  [CLS] bZIP25, previously described bZIP [CLS]  regulators of\nMAT gene expression, significantly enhances DNA binding activity and produces a synergistic increase in target gene activation.\nFull-level target gene activation is strongly correlated with the ratio"]]
["seedev_train_767", [" correlated with the ratio of the correspondent bZIP heterodimerization partners.\nWhereas bZIP53 does not interact with ABI3, a crucial transcriptional regulator in Arabidopsis seeds, ternary complex formation between the  [CLS] bZIP heterodimers and ABI3 increases the expression of MAT genes in planta [CLS] .\nWe therefore propose that heterodimers containing bZIP53 participate in enhanceosome formation to produce a dramatic increase\nin MAT gene transcription.\n"]]
["seedev_train_768", [" DNA binding activity and produces a synergistic increase in target gene activation.\nFull-level target gene activation is strongly correlated with the ratio of the correspondent bZIP heterodimerization partners.\nWhereas  [CLS] bZIP53 does not interact with ABI3, a crucial transcriptional regulator in Arabidopsis seeds, ternary complex formation between the bZIP heterodimers and ABI3 increases the expression of MAT genes in planta [CLS] .\nWe therefore propose that heterodimers containing bZIP53 participate in enhanceosome formation to produce a dramatic increase\nin MAT gene transcription.\n"]]
["seedev_train_769", [" in developing seeds precedes and overlaps that of its target genes. Gain- and loss-of-function approaches indicate\na correlation between the amount of bZIP53 protein and MAT gene expression. Specific  [CLS] in vivo and in vitro binding of bZIP53 [CLS] \nprotein to a G-box element in the albumin 2S2 promoter is demonstrated. Importantly, heterodimerization with bZIP10 or bZIP25, previously described bZIP regulators of\nMAT gene expression, significantly enhances DNA"]]
["seedev_train_770", [" in developing seeds precedes and overlaps that of its target genes. Gain- and loss-of-function approaches indicate\na correlation between the amount of bZIP53 protein and MAT gene expression. Specific  [CLS] in vivo and in vitro binding of bZIP53\nprotein to a G-box [CLS]  element in the albumin 2S2 promoter is demonstrated. Importantly, heterodimerization with bZIP10 or bZIP25, previously described bZIP regulators of\nMAT gene expression, significantly enhances DNA binding activity and produces"]]
["seedev_train_771", [" precedes and overlaps that of its target genes. Gain- and loss-of-function approaches indicate\na correlation between the amount of bZIP53 protein and MAT gene expression. Specific in vivo and  [CLS] in vitro binding of bZIP53\nprotein to a G-box [CLS]  element in the albumin 2S2 promoter is demonstrated. Importantly, heterodimerization with bZIP10 or bZIP25, previously described bZIP regulators of\nMAT gene expression, significantly enhances DNA binding activity and produces"]]
["seedev_train_772", [" is a class A floral homeotic gene (Bowman et\u00a0al., 1989; Jofuku et\u00a0al., 1994; Okamuro et\u00a0al., 1997) and it is also involved in control of seed size (Ohto et\u00a0al., 2005).  [CLS] ANT regulates ovule development and floral organ growth [CLS]  (Elliott et\u00a0al., 1996; Mizukami and Fischer, 2000), and PLETHORA1 (PLT1) and PLT2 are required for stem cell specification and maintenance in the root meristem (Aida et\u00a0al., 2004). The AP-2", " is a class A floral homeotic gene (Bowman et\u00a0al., 1989; Jofuku et\u00a0al., 1994; Okamuro et\u00a0al., 1997) and it is also involved in control of seed size (Ohto et\u00a0al., 2005).  [CLS] ANT regulates ovule development [CLS]  and floral organ growth (Elliott et\u00a0al., 1996; Mizukami and Fischer, 2000), and PLETHORA1 (PLT1) and PLT2 are required for stem cell specification and maintenance in the root meristem (Aida"]]
["seedev_train_773", [" it is also involved in control of seed size (Ohto et\u00a0al., 2005). ANT regulates ovule development and floral organ growth (Elliott et\u00a0al., 1996; Mizukami and Fischer, 2000), and PLETHORA1 ( [CLS] PLT1) and PLT2 are required for stem cell specification and maintenance [CLS]  in the root meristem (Aida et\u00a0al., 2004). The AP-2 type transcription factors from various plant species have been classified into three major lineages (Kim et\u00a0al., 2006), and WRI1 and", " it is also involved in control of seed size (Ohto et\u00a0al., 2005). ANT regulates ovule development and floral organ growth (Elliott et\u00a0al., 1996; Mizukami and Fischer, 2000), and PLETHORA1 ( [CLS] PLT1) and PLT2 are required for stem cell specification [CLS]  and maintenance in the root meristem (Aida et\u00a0al., 2004). The AP-2 type transcription factors from various plant species have been classified into three major lineages (Kim et\u00a0al., 2006), and"]]
["seedev_train_774", [" also involved in control of seed size (Ohto et\u00a0al., 2005). ANT regulates ovule development and floral organ growth (Elliott et\u00a0al., 1996; Mizukami and Fischer, 2000), and PLETHORA1 (PLT1) and  [CLS] PLT2 are required for stem cell specification [CLS]  and maintenance in the root meristem (Aida et\u00a0al., 2004). The AP-2 type transcription factors from various plant species have been classified into three major lineages (Kim et\u00a0al., 2006), and", " also involved in control of seed size (Ohto et\u00a0al., 2005). ANT regulates ovule development and floral organ growth (Elliott et\u00a0al., 1996; Mizukami and Fischer, 2000), and PLETHORA1 (PLT1) and  [CLS] PLT2 are required for stem cell specification and maintenance [CLS]  in the root meristem (Aida et\u00a0al., 2004). The AP-2 type transcription factors from various plant species have been classified into three major lineages (Kim et\u00a0al., 2006), and WRI1 and"]]
["seedev_train_775", [" ANT-binding consensus sequence, 5\u2032-(g/a)CnT(t/c)GggA(A/T)n-(T/C)GTGc-3\u2032, shows the [CnTnG] core of the AW-box in the 5\u2032-half, while the sequence of the 3\u2032-half is TG rather than CG in the AW-box.\nThe  [CLS] AP2-type transcription factors characterized previously act as important key regulators in meristem function and organ development [CLS] . For example, AP2 is a class A floral homeotic gene (Bowman et\u00a0al., 1989; Jofuku et\u00a0al., 1994; Okamuro et\u00a0al., 1997) and it is also involved in control of seed size"]]
["seedev_train_776", [" ANT-binding consensus sequence, 5\u2032-(g/a)CnT(t/c)GggA(A/T)n-(T/C)GTGc-3\u2032, shows the [CnTnG] core of the AW-box in the 5\u2032-half, while the sequence of the 3\u2032-half is TG rather than CG in the AW-box.\nThe  [CLS] AP2-type transcription factors characterized previously act as important key regulators in meristem function [CLS]  and organ development. For example, AP2 is a class A floral homeotic gene (Bowman et\u00a0al., 1989; Jofuku et\u00a0al., 1994; Okamuro et\u00a0al., 1997) and it is also involved in control"]]
["seedev_train_777", [" [CLS] upstream regions of Pl-PK\u03b21, KAS1, BCCP2, and SUS2 contained the conserved AW-box [CLS]  sequence 5\u2032-[CnTnG](n)7[CG]-3\u2032 (Figure\u00a04f), and mutational analysis of the site 1 AW-box of Pl-PK\u03b21 indicated that each of the five conserved nucleotides is critical for WRI1 binding (Figure\u00a05c).\nThe DNA-binding", " [CLS] upstream regions of Pl-PK\u03b21, KAS1, BCCP2, and SUS2 contained the conserved AW-box [CLS]  sequence 5\u2032-[CnTnG](n)7[CG]-3\u2032 (Figure\u00a04f), and mutational analysis of the site 1 AW-box of Pl-PK\u03b21 indicated that each of the five conserved nucleotides is critical for WRI1 binding (Figure\u00a05c).\nThe DNA-binding", " [CLS] upstream regions of Pl-PK\u03b21, KAS1, BCCP2, and SUS2 contained the conserved AW-box [CLS]  sequence 5\u2032-[CnTnG](n)7[CG]-3\u2032 (Figure\u00a04f), and mutational analysis of the site 1 AW-box of Pl-PK\u03b21 indicated that each of the five conserved nucleotides is critical for WRI1 binding (Figure\u00a05c).\nThe DNA-binding", " [CLS] upstream regions of Pl-PK\u03b21, KAS1, BCCP2, and SUS2 contained the conserved AW-box [CLS]  sequence 5\u2032-[CnTnG](n)7[CG]-3\u2032 (Figure\u00a04f), and mutational analysis of the site 1 AW-box of Pl-PK\u03b21 indicated that each of the five conserved nucleotides is critical for WRI1 binding (Figure\u00a05c).\nThe DNA-binding"]]
["seedev_train_778", [" sequences are both longer than those for transcription factors with single AP2 domain. The 3\u2032-half of the 16-bp ANT-binding sequence is similar to the DRE sequences (CCGAC), to which  [CLS] EREBP-like single AP2 domain [CLS]  factors binds, suggesting that two AP2 domains of ANT uniquely participate in DNA binding (Nole-Wilson and Krizek, 2000; Krizek, 2003). The opposite strand sequence of the ANT-binding consensus sequence,"]]
["seedev_train_779", [" [CLS] AW-box sequence 5\u2032-[CnTnG](n)7[CG]-3\u2032 [CLS]  (Figure\u00a04f), and mutational analysis of the site 1 AW-box of Pl-PK\u03b21 indicated that each of the five conserved nucleotides is critical for WRI1 binding (Figure\u00a05c).\nThe DNA-binding activity of"]]
["seedev_train_780", [" that two AP2 domains of ANT uniquely participate in DNA binding (Nole-Wilson and Krizek, 2000; Krizek, 2003). The opposite strand sequence of the ANT-binding consensus sequence, 5\u2032-(g/a)CnT(t/c)GggA(A/T)n-(T/C)GTGc-3\u2032, shows the  [CLS] [CnTnG] core of the AW-box [CLS]  in the 5\u2032-half, while the sequence of the 3\u2032-half is TG rather than CG in the AW-box.\nThe AP2-type transcription factors characterized previously act as important key regulators in"]]
["seedev_train_781", [" [CLS] WRI1 binds to the AW-box [CLS]  with two core motifs\nThe WRI1 binding sites in the upstream regions of Pl-PK\u03b21, KAS1, BCCP2, and SUS2 contained the conserved AW-box sequence 5\u2032-[CnTnG](n)7[CG]-3\u2032 (Figure\u00a04f), and mutational analysis of", " motifs\nThe WRI1 binding sites in the upstream regions of Pl-PK\u03b21, KAS1, BCCP2, and SUS2 contained the conserved AW-box sequence 5\u2032-[CnTnG](n)7[CG]-3\u2032 (Figure\u00a04f), and mutational analysis of the site 1  [CLS] AW-box of Pl-PK\u03b21 indicated that each of the five conserved nucleotides is critical for WRI1 [CLS]  binding (Figure\u00a05c).\nThe DNA-binding activity of Arabidopsis ANT has been characterized previously. Repeated selection of random oligonucleotides that bind with a recombinant ANT fragment corresponding to two AP2 domains"]]
["seedev_train_782", [" and WRI1-binding site sequences are both longer than those for transcription factors with single AP2 domain. The 3\u2032-half of the 16-bp ANT-binding sequence is similar to the DRE sequences ( [CLS] CCGAC), to which EREBP-like single AP2 domain [CLS]  factors binds, suggesting that two AP2 domains of ANT uniquely participate in DNA binding (Nole-Wilson and Krizek, 2000; Krizek, 2003). The opposite strand sequence of the ANT-binding consensus sequence,"]]
["seedev_train_783", [" for WRI1 binding (Figure\u00a05c).\nThe DNA-binding activity of Arabidopsis ANT has been characterized previously. Repeated selection of random oligonucleotides that bind with a recombinant ANT fragment corresponding to two  [CLS] AP2 domains results in enrichment of oligonucleotides with a consensus sequence of 5\u2032-gCAC(A/G)N(A/T)TcCC(a/g)ANG(c/t)-3\u2032 [CLS]  (Nole-Wilson and Krizek, 2000). Although the AW-box sequences do not match to this sequence, there are some similarities between them. The ANT- and WRI1-binding site sequences are both longer"]]
["seedev_train_784", [" [CLS] WRI1 binding sites in the upstream regions of Pl-PK\u03b21, KAS1, BCCP2 [CLS] , and SUS2 contained the conserved AW-box sequence 5\u2032-[CnTnG](n)7[CG]-3\u2032 (Figure\u00a04f), and mutational analysis of the site 1 AW-box of Pl-PK\u03b21 indicated that each of the five conserved nucleotides is critical", " [CLS] WRI1 binding sites in the upstream regions of Pl-PK\u03b21, KAS1, BCCP2, and SUS2 [CLS]  contained the conserved AW-box sequence 5\u2032-[CnTnG](n)7[CG]-3\u2032 (Figure\u00a04f), and mutational analysis of the site 1 AW-box of Pl-PK\u03b21 indicated that each of the five conserved nucleotides is critical for WRI1", " [CLS] WRI1 binding sites in the upstream regions of Pl-PK\u03b21 [CLS] , KAS1, BCCP2, and SUS2 contained the conserved AW-box sequence 5\u2032-[CnTnG](n)7[CG]-3\u2032 (Figure\u00a04f), and mutational analysis of the site 1 AW-box of Pl-PK\u03b21 indicated that each of the five conserved nucleotides", " [CLS] WRI1 binding sites in the upstream regions of Pl-PK\u03b21, KAS1 [CLS] , BCCP2, and SUS2 contained the conserved AW-box sequence 5\u2032-[CnTnG](n)7[CG]-3\u2032 (Figure\u00a04f), and mutational analysis of the site 1 AW-box of Pl-PK\u03b21 indicated that each of the five conserved nucleotides is", " or PKp-\u03b21, further establishes that WRI1 is able to strongly modulate the activity of these two promoters in\u00a0planta (Figure\u00a04a,b). Finally, EMSA (Figure\u00a08) and yeast one-hybrid experiments (Figure\u00a07a) demonstrate that  [CLS] WRI1 is able to interact with the BCCP2 promoter [CLS] , strongly suggesting that this gene is a direct target of WRI1 in\u00a0planta. It is noteworthy that the fine characterization of the changes in mRNA accumulation for BCCP2, PKp-\u03b21 and"]]
["seedev_train_785", [" characterized previously. Repeated selection of random oligonucleotides that bind with a recombinant ANT fragment corresponding to two AP2 domains results in enrichment of oligonucleotides with a consensus sequence of  [CLS] 5\u2032-gCAC(A/G)N(A/T)TcCC(a/g)ANG(c/t)-3\u2032 (Nole-Wilson and Krizek, 2000). Although the AW-box [CLS]  sequences do not match to this sequence, there are some similarities between them. The ANT- and WRI1-binding site sequences are both longer than those for transcription factors with single"]]
["seedev_train_786", [" sequences (CCGAC), to which EREBP-like single AP2 domain factors binds, suggesting that two AP2 domains of ANT uniquely participate in DNA binding (Nole-Wilson and Krizek, 2000; Krizek, 2003). The  [CLS] opposite strand sequence of the ANT-binding consensus sequence, 5\u2032-(g/a)CnT(t/c)GggA(A/T)n-(T/C)GTGc-3\u2032 [CLS] , shows the [CnTnG] core of the AW-box in the 5\u2032-half, while the sequence of the 3\u2032-half is TG rather than CG in the AW-box.\nThe AP2-type transcription factors characterized"]]
["seedev_train_787", [" The ANT- and WRI1-binding site sequences are both longer than those for transcription factors with single AP2 domain. The 3\u2032-half of the 16-bp ANT-binding sequence is similar to the  [CLS] DRE sequences (CCGAC [CLS] ), to which EREBP-like single AP2 domain factors binds, suggesting that two AP2 domains of ANT uniquely participate in DNA binding (Nole-Wilson and Krizek, 2000; Krizek, 2003). The opposite strand"]]
["seedev_train_788", [" and it is also involved in control of seed size (Ohto et\u00a0al., 2005). ANT regulates ovule development and floral organ growth (Elliott et\u00a0al., 1996; Mizukami and Fischer, 2000), and  [CLS] PLETHORA1 (PLT1 [CLS] ) and PLT2 are required for stem cell specification and maintenance in the root meristem (Aida et\u00a0al., 2004). The AP-2 type transcription factors from various plant species have been classified"]]
["seedev_train_789", [" growth (Elliott et\u00a0al., 1996; Mizukami and Fischer, 2000), and PLETHORA1 (PLT1) and PLT2 are required for stem cell specification and maintenance in the root meristem (Aida et\u00a0al., 2004). The  [CLS] AP-2 type transcription factors from various plant species have been classified into three major lineages (Kim et\u00a0al., 2006), and WRI1 [CLS]  and two other related factors [WRI1/ASML1-related Two-1 (WAT1; At1g16060) and -2 (WAT2; At1g79700)] of Arabidopsis are in the lineage different from the ANT lineage. Comparison of the consensus binding"]]
["seedev_train_790", [" growth (Elliott et\u00a0al., 1996; Mizukami and Fischer, 2000), and PLETHORA1 (PLT1) and PLT2 are required for stem cell specification and maintenance in the root meristem (Aida et\u00a0al., 2004). The  [CLS] AP-2 type transcription factors from various plant species have been classified into three major lineages (Kim et\u00a0al., 2006), and WRI1 and two other related factors [WRI1/ASML1-related Two-1 (WAT1; At1g16060) and -2 (WAT2 [CLS] ; At1g79700)] of Arabidopsis are in the lineage different from the ANT lineage. Comparison of the consensus binding site sequences among AP2-type factors in different lineages is expected to elucidate"]]
["seedev_train_791", [" growth (Elliott et\u00a0al., 1996; Mizukami and Fischer, 2000), and PLETHORA1 (PLT1) and PLT2 are required for stem cell specification and maintenance in the root meristem (Aida et\u00a0al., 2004). The  [CLS] AP-2 type transcription factors from various plant species have been classified into three major lineages (Kim et\u00a0al., 2006), and WRI1 and two other related factors [WRI1/ASML1-related Two-1 (WAT1; At1g16060) and -2 (WAT2; At1g79700)] of Arabidopsis are in the lineage different from the ANT [CLS]  lineage. Comparison of the consensus binding site sequences among AP2-type factors in different lineages is expected to elucidate the structure\u2013function relationship of the double AP2 domain transcription factors and"]]
["seedev_train_792", [" growth (Elliott et\u00a0al., 1996; Mizukami and Fischer, 2000), and PLETHORA1 (PLT1) and PLT2 are required for stem cell specification and maintenance in the root meristem (Aida et\u00a0al., 2004). The  [CLS] AP-2 type transcription factors from various plant species have been classified into three major lineages (Kim et\u00a0al., 2006), and WRI1 and two other related factors [WRI1/ASML1-related Two-1 (WAT1 [CLS] ; At1g16060) and -2 (WAT2; At1g79700)] of Arabidopsis are in the lineage different from the ANT lineage. Comparison of the consensus binding site sequences among AP2-type factors in different lineages"]]
["seedev_train_793", [" transcription factors from various plant species have been classified into three major lineages (Kim et\u00a0al., 2006), and WRI1 and two other related factors [WRI1/ASML1-related Two-1 (WAT1; At1g16060) and -2 ( [CLS] WAT2; At1g79700 [CLS] )] of Arabidopsis are in the lineage different from the ANT lineage. Comparison of the consensus binding site sequences among AP2-type factors in different lineages is expected to elucidate the"]]
["seedev_train_794", [" 2004). The AP-2 type transcription factors from various plant species have been classified into three major lineages (Kim et\u00a0al., 2006), and WRI1 and two other related factors [WRI1/ASML1-related Two-1 ( [CLS] WAT1; At1g16060 [CLS] ) and -2 (WAT2; At1g79700)] of Arabidopsis are in the lineage different from the ANT lineage. Comparison of the consensus binding site sequences among AP2-type factors in different lineages is"]]
["seedev_train_795", [" factors from various plant species have been classified into three major lineages (Kim et\u00a0al., 2006), and WRI1 and two other related factors [WRI1/ASML1-related Two-1 (WAT1; At1g16060) and -2 (WAT2;  [CLS] At1g79700)] of Arabidopsis [CLS]  are in the lineage different from the ANT lineage. Comparison of the consensus binding site sequences among AP2-type factors in different lineages is expected to elucidate the structure\u2013function relationship"]]
["seedev_train_796", [" The AP-2 type transcription factors from various plant species have been classified into three major lineages (Kim et\u00a0al., 2006), and WRI1 and two other related factors [WRI1/ASML1-related Two-1 (WAT1;  [CLS] At1g16060) and -2 (WAT2; At1g79700)] of Arabidopsis [CLS]  are in the lineage different from the ANT lineage. Comparison of the consensus binding site sequences among AP2-type factors in different lineages is expected to elucidate the structure\u2013function relationship"]]
["seedev_train_797", [" transcription factors from various plant species have been classified into three major lineages (Kim et\u00a0al., 2006), and WRI1 and two other related factors [WRI1/ASML1-related Two-1 (WAT1; At1g16060) and -2 ( [CLS] WAT2; At1g79700)] of Arabidopsis [CLS]  are in the lineage different from the ANT lineage. Comparison of the consensus binding site sequences among AP2-type factors in different lineages is expected to elucidate the structure\u2013function relationship"]]
["seedev_train_798", [" 2004). The AP-2 type transcription factors from various plant species have been classified into three major lineages (Kim et\u00a0al., 2006), and WRI1 and two other related factors [WRI1/ASML1-related Two-1 ( [CLS] WAT1; At1g16060) and -2 (WAT2; At1g79700)] of Arabidopsis [CLS]  are in the lineage different from the ANT lineage. Comparison of the consensus binding site sequences among AP2-type factors in different lineages is expected to elucidate the structure\u2013function relationship"]]
["seedev_train_799", [" it is also involved in control of seed size (Ohto et\u00a0al., 2005). ANT regulates ovule development and floral organ growth (Elliott et\u00a0al., 1996; Mizukami and Fischer, 2000), and PLETHORA1 ( [CLS] PLT1) and PLT2 are required for stem cell specification and maintenance in the root meristem [CLS]  (Aida et\u00a0al., 2004). The AP-2 type transcription factors from various plant species have been classified into three major lineages (Kim et\u00a0al., 2006), and WRI1 and two other related factors"]]
["seedev_train_800", [" also involved in control of seed size (Ohto et\u00a0al., 2005). ANT regulates ovule development and floral organ growth (Elliott et\u00a0al., 1996; Mizukami and Fischer, 2000), and PLETHORA1 (PLT1) and  [CLS] PLT2 are required for stem cell specification and maintenance in the root meristem [CLS]  (Aida et\u00a0al., 2004). The AP-2 type transcription factors from various plant species have been classified into three major lineages (Kim et\u00a0al., 2006), and WRI1 and two other related factors"]]
["seedev_train_801", [" of seed size (Ohto et\u00a0al., 2005). ANT regulates ovule development and floral organ growth (Elliott et\u00a0al., 1996; Mizukami and Fischer, 2000), and PLETHORA1 (PLT1) and PLT2 are required for  [CLS] stem cell specification and maintenance in the root meristem [CLS]  (Aida et\u00a0al., 2004). The AP-2 type transcription factors from various plant species have been classified into three major lineages (Kim et\u00a0al., 2006), and WRI1 and two other related factors", " of seed size (Ohto et\u00a0al., 2005). ANT regulates ovule development and floral organ growth (Elliott et\u00a0al., 1996; Mizukami and Fischer, 2000), and PLETHORA1 (PLT1) and PLT2 are required for  [CLS] stem cell specification and maintenance in the root meristem [CLS]  (Aida et\u00a0al., 2004). The AP-2 type transcription factors from various plant species have been classified into three major lineages (Kim et\u00a0al., 2006), and WRI1 and two other related factors"]]
["seedev_train_802", [" bell-shaped pattern of expression between 5 and 13\u00a0DAA (Ruuska et\u00a0al., 2002). This is corroborated in our study by qRT-PCR experiments aimed at characterizing the steady-state accumulation of BCCP2 and  [CLS] PKp-\u03b21 mRNAs among a developmental series of maturing siliques [CLS]  (Figure\u00a03a) or seeds (Figure\u00a0S1). The WRI1 transcription factor, previously shown to represent a node in the regulatory network controlling oilseed metabolism (Cernac and Benning, 2004), was proposed to trigger", " bell-shaped pattern of expression between 5 and 13\u00a0DAA (Ruuska et\u00a0al., 2002). This is corroborated in our study by qRT-PCR experiments aimed at characterizing the steady-state accumulation of BCCP2 and  [CLS] PKp-\u03b21 mRNAs among a developmental series of maturing siliques (Figure\u00a03a) or seeds [CLS]  (Figure\u00a0S1). The WRI1 transcription factor, previously shown to represent a node in the regulatory network controlling oilseed metabolism (Cernac and Benning, 2004), was proposed to trigger the transcription of"]]
["seedev_train_803", [" display a bell-shaped pattern of expression between 5 and 13\u00a0DAA (Ruuska et\u00a0al., 2002). This is corroborated in our study by qRT-PCR experiments aimed at characterizing the steady-state accumulation of  [CLS] BCCP2 and PKp-\u03b21 mRNAs among a developmental series of maturing siliques (Figure\u00a03a) or seeds [CLS]  (Figure\u00a0S1). The WRI1 transcription factor, previously shown to represent a node in the regulatory network controlling oilseed metabolism (Cernac and Benning, 2004), was proposed to trigger the transcription of", " display a bell-shaped pattern of expression between 5 and 13\u00a0DAA (Ruuska et\u00a0al., 2002). This is corroborated in our study by qRT-PCR experiments aimed at characterizing the steady-state accumulation of  [CLS] BCCP2 and PKp-\u03b21 mRNAs among a developmental series of maturing siliques [CLS]  (Figure\u00a03a) or seeds (Figure\u00a0S1). The WRI1 transcription factor, previously shown to represent a node in the regulatory network controlling oilseed metabolism (Cernac and Benning, 2004), was proposed to trigger"]]
["seedev_train_804", [" in tissues overexpressing WRI1 ectopically (Ruuska et\u00a0al., 2002; Baud et\u00a0al., 2007a). In this study, the use of the uidA reporter gene, the expression of which is driven by full-length  [CLS] promoter sequences of either BCCP2 or PKp-\u03b21, further establishes that WRI1 [CLS]  is able to strongly modulate the activity of these two promoters in\u00a0planta (Figure\u00a04a,b). Finally, EMSA (Figure\u00a08) and yeast one-hybrid experiments (Figure\u00a07a) demonstrate that WRI1 is able to interact with", " in tissues overexpressing WRI1 ectopically (Ruuska et\u00a0al., 2002; Baud et\u00a0al., 2007a). In this study, the use of the uidA reporter gene, the expression of which is driven by full-length  [CLS] promoter sequences of either BCCP2 or PKp-\u03b21, further establishes that WRI1 [CLS]  is able to strongly modulate the activity of these two promoters in\u00a0planta (Figure\u00a04a,b). Finally, EMSA (Figure\u00a08) and yeast one-hybrid experiments (Figure\u00a07a) demonstrate that WRI1 is able to interact with"]]
["seedev_train_805", [" able to strongly modulate the activity of these two promoters in\u00a0planta (Figure\u00a04a,b). Finally, EMSA (Figure\u00a08) and yeast one-hybrid experiments (Figure\u00a07a) demonstrate that WRI1 is able to interact with the  [CLS] BCCP2 promoter, strongly suggesting that this gene is a direct target of WRI1 [CLS]  in\u00a0planta. It is noteworthy that the fine characterization of the changes in mRNA accumulation for BCCP2, PKp-\u03b21 and WRI1 throughout silique development shows that the induction of the regulatory"]]
["seedev_train_806", [" (2004) have reported that expression of WRI1 cDNA under the control of the cauliflower mosaic virus 35S-promoter leads to slightly increased seed oil content, neither the Pro35Sdual:WRI1 nor the  [CLS] ProS2:WRI1 transgene used in the present study efficiently stimulates oil accumulation [CLS]  in the corresponding transgenic seeds (Tables\u00a01 and 2). Several factors like growth conditions or strength and specificity of the different promoters used (classical Pro35S versus Pro35Sdual or ProS2) may"]]
["seedev_train_807", [" of this biochemical process in the complex framework of seed development, are only partially characterized (Santos Mendoza et\u00a0al., 2008). Complementary expression analyses and transcriptomic approaches have demonstrated that the  [CLS] biosynthetic pathways for fatty acids and lipids are largely regulated at the transcriptional level in maturing seeds [CLS]  (Ruuska et\u00a0al., 2002). The \u2018contrapuntal\u2019 or differential timing of the expression of genes involved in oil metabolism during seed development most probably reflects distinct regulatory pathways controlling the transcription", " of this biochemical process in the complex framework of seed development, are only partially characterized (Santos Mendoza et\u00a0al., 2008). Complementary expression analyses and transcriptomic approaches have demonstrated that the  [CLS] biosynthetic pathways for fatty acids and lipids are largely regulated at the transcriptional level in maturing seeds [CLS]  (Ruuska et\u00a0al., 2002). The \u2018contrapuntal\u2019 or differential timing of the expression of genes involved in oil metabolism during seed development most probably reflects distinct regulatory pathways controlling the transcription"]]
["seedev_train_808", [" WRI1 peptide, and post-translational regulations (e.g. translocation of WRI1 towards the nucleus or putative recruitment of its interacting partners).\nWhereas Cernac and Benning (2004) have reported that expression of  [CLS] WRI1 cDNA under the control of the cauliflower mosaic virus 35S-promoter leads to slightly increased seed oil content [CLS] , neither the Pro35Sdual:WRI1 nor the ProS2:WRI1 transgene used in the present study efficiently stimulates oil accumulation in the corresponding transgenic seeds (Tables\u00a01 and 2). Several factors like growth conditions"]]
["seedev_train_809", [" in our study by qRT-PCR experiments aimed at characterizing the steady-state accumulation of BCCP2 and PKp-\u03b21 mRNAs among a developmental series of maturing siliques (Figure\u00a03a) or seeds (Figure\u00a0S1). The  [CLS] WRI1 transcription factor, previously shown to represent a node in the regulatory network controlling oilseed metabolism [CLS]  (Cernac and Benning, 2004), was proposed to trigger the transcription of the set of genes involved in the conversion of sucrose into fatty acids. This hypothesis was based on", " in our study by qRT-PCR experiments aimed at characterizing the steady-state accumulation of BCCP2 and PKp-\u03b21 mRNAs among a developmental series of maturing siliques (Figure\u00a03a) or seeds (Figure\u00a0S1). The  [CLS] WRI1 transcription factor, previously shown to represent a node in the regulatory network controlling oilseed metabolism (Cernac and Benning, 2004), was proposed to trigger the transcription of the set of genes involved in the conversion of sucrose into fatty acids [CLS] . This hypothesis was based on the analysis of the expression profiles of putative target genes of WRI1 characterized in various wri1 mutant backgrounds, and in tissues overexpressing WRI1 ectopically", " [CLS] WRI1 directly enhances the expression of genes involved in glycolysis [CLS]  and fatty acid biosynthesis\nFactors controlling the overall level of oil stored in seeds of A.\u00a0thaliana, and the integration of this biochemical process in the complex framework of seed", " [CLS] WRI1 directly enhances the expression of genes involved in glycolysis and fatty acid biosynthesis [CLS] \nFactors controlling the overall level of oil stored in seeds of A.\u00a0thaliana, and the integration of this biochemical process in the complex framework of seed development, are only partially"]]
["seedev_train_810", [" Cernac and Benning (2004) have reported that expression of WRI1 cDNA under the control of the cauliflower mosaic virus 35S-promoter leads to slightly increased seed oil content, neither the  [CLS] Pro35Sdual:WRI1 nor the ProS2:WRI1 transgene used in the present study efficiently stimulates oil accumulation [CLS]  in the corresponding transgenic seeds (Tables\u00a01 and 2). Several factors like growth conditions or strength and specificity of the different promoters used (classical Pro35S versus Pro35Sdual or ProS2) may"]]
["seedev_train_811", [" full-length promoter sequences of either BCCP2 or PKp-\u03b21, further establishes that WRI1 is able to strongly modulate the activity of these two promoters in\u00a0planta (Figure\u00a04a,b). Finally, EMSA (Figure\u00a08) and  [CLS] yeast one-hybrid experiments (Figure\u00a07a) demonstrate that WRI1 [CLS]  is able to interact with the BCCP2 promoter, strongly suggesting that this gene is a direct target of WRI1 in\u00a0planta. It is noteworthy that the fine characterization of the"]]
["seedev_train_812", [" full-length promoter sequences of either BCCP2 or PKp-\u03b21, further establishes that WRI1 is able to strongly modulate the activity of these two promoters in\u00a0planta (Figure\u00a04a,b). Finally, EMSA (Figure\u00a08) and  [CLS] yeast one-hybrid experiments (Figure\u00a07a) demonstrate that WRI1 is able to interact with the BCCP2 promoter [CLS] , strongly suggesting that this gene is a direct target of WRI1 in\u00a0planta. It is noteworthy that the fine characterization of the changes in mRNA accumulation for BCCP2, PKp-\u03b21 and"]]
["seedev_train_813", [" Finally, EMSA (Figure\u00a08) and yeast one-hybrid experiments (Figure\u00a07a) demonstrate that WRI1 is able to interact with the BCCP2 promoter, strongly suggesting that this gene is a direct target of  [CLS] WRI1 in\u00a0planta [CLS] . It is noteworthy that the fine characterization of the changes in mRNA accumulation for BCCP2, PKp-\u03b21 and WRI1 throughout silique development shows that the induction of the regulatory factor", " 2007a). In this study, the use of the uidA reporter gene, the expression of which is driven by full-length promoter sequences of either BCCP2 or PKp-\u03b21, further establishes that  [CLS] WRI1 is able to strongly modulate the activity of these two promoters in\u00a0planta [CLS]  (Figure\u00a04a,b). Finally, EMSA (Figure\u00a08) and yeast one-hybrid experiments (Figure\u00a07a) demonstrate that WRI1 is able to interact with the BCCP2 promoter, strongly suggesting that this gene is a direct target"]]
["seedev_train_814", [" (2004) have reported that expression of WRI1 cDNA under the control of the cauliflower mosaic virus 35S-promoter leads to slightly increased seed oil content, neither the Pro35Sdual:WRI1 nor the  [CLS] ProS2:WRI1 transgene used in the present study efficiently stimulates oil accumulation in the corresponding transgenic seeds [CLS]  (Tables\u00a01 and 2). Several factors like growth conditions or strength and specificity of the different promoters used (classical Pro35S versus Pro35Sdual or ProS2) may explain these apparent discrepancies. However,"]]
["seedev_train_815", [" Cernac and Benning (2004) have reported that expression of WRI1 cDNA under the control of the cauliflower mosaic virus 35S-promoter leads to slightly increased seed oil content, neither the  [CLS] Pro35Sdual:WRI1 nor the ProS2:WRI1 transgene used in the present study efficiently stimulates oil accumulation in the corresponding transgenic seeds [CLS]  (Tables\u00a01 and 2). Several factors like growth conditions or strength and specificity of the different promoters used (classical Pro35S versus Pro35Sdual or ProS2) may explain these apparent discrepancies. However,"]]
["seedev_train_816", [" in tissues overexpressing WRI1 ectopically (Ruuska et\u00a0al., 2002; Baud et\u00a0al., 2007a). In this study, the use of the uidA reporter gene, the expression of which is driven by full-length  [CLS] promoter sequences of either BCCP2 or PKp-\u03b21, further establishes that WRI1 is able to strongly modulate the activity of these two promoters in\u00a0planta [CLS]  (Figure\u00a04a,b). Finally, EMSA (Figure\u00a08) and yeast one-hybrid experiments (Figure\u00a07a) demonstrate that WRI1 is able to interact with the BCCP2 promoter, strongly suggesting that this gene is a direct target", " in tissues overexpressing WRI1 ectopically (Ruuska et\u00a0al., 2002; Baud et\u00a0al., 2007a). In this study, the use of the uidA reporter gene, the expression of which is driven by full-length  [CLS] promoter sequences of either BCCP2 or PKp-\u03b21, further establishes that WRI1 is able to strongly modulate the activity of these two promoters in\u00a0planta [CLS]  (Figure\u00a04a,b). Finally, EMSA (Figure\u00a08) and yeast one-hybrid experiments (Figure\u00a07a) demonstrate that WRI1 is able to interact with the BCCP2 promoter, strongly suggesting that this gene is a direct target"]]
["seedev_train_817", [" able to strongly modulate the activity of these two promoters in\u00a0planta (Figure\u00a04a,b). Finally, EMSA (Figure\u00a08) and yeast one-hybrid experiments (Figure\u00a07a) demonstrate that WRI1 is able to interact with the  [CLS] BCCP2 promoter, strongly suggesting that this gene is a direct target of WRI1 in\u00a0planta [CLS] . It is noteworthy that the fine characterization of the changes in mRNA accumulation for BCCP2, PKp-\u03b21 and WRI1 throughout silique development shows that the induction of the regulatory factor"]]
["seedev_train_818", [" the control of the cauliflower mosaic virus 35S-promoter leads to slightly increased seed oil content, neither the Pro35Sdual:WRI1 nor the ProS2:WRI1 transgene used in the present study efficiently stimulates  [CLS] oil accumulation in the corresponding transgenic seeds [CLS]  (Tables\u00a01 and 2). Several factors like growth conditions or strength and specificity of the different promoters used (classical Pro35S versus Pro35Sdual or ProS2) may explain these apparent discrepancies. However,"]]
["seedev_train_819", [" these enhancer elements using PLACE reveals the presence of shared nucleotide sequences that may constitute putative recognition sequences bound by the transcriptional machinery triggering fatty acid biosynthesis. The hexanucleotide  [CLS] AACCCA that can be observed on the minus strand of each enhancer element has previously been described as the core of the SEF3-recognition sequence [CLS]  (Allen et\u00a0al., 1989). This DNA binding factor was identified in nuclear extracts from developing soybean seeds, and was initially presented as a positive regulator of transcription of the \u03b2-conglycinin,"]]
["seedev_train_820", [" 1989). This DNA binding factor was identified in nuclear extracts from developing soybean seeds, and was initially presented as a positive regulator of transcription of the \u03b2-conglycinin, \u03b1-subunit gene.  [CLS] SEF3-like activities were reported in seeds [CLS]  of other oleaginous species, such as tobacco and sunflower (Lessard et\u00a0al., 1991). In soybean, SEF3 was shown to bind specifically to a site composed of two AACCCA elements separated"]]
["seedev_train_821", [" SEF3 factor in\u00a0vitro did not affect the in vivo promoter activity in a significant manner (Fujiwara and Beachy, 1994). Similarly, in this study, we show that mutations in the  [CLS] AACCCA element of the BCCP2 promoter [CLS]  (m2; Figure\u00a05b) do not impact on promoter activity (Figure\u00a06). These results strongly suggest that isolated core SEF3 recognition sequences do not constitute essential cis-regulatory elements of the lipogenic pathway.", " [CLS] PKp-\u03b21 promoters have led to the identification of enhancing regions of 54 and 79\u00a0bp, respectively, that are essential to direct the activity of these promoters in oil-accumulating tissues of the embryo. Comparison of these enhancer elements using PLACE reveals the presence of shared nucleotide sequences that may constitute putative recognition sequences bound by the transcriptional machinery triggering fatty acid biosynthesis. The hexanucleotide AACCCA [CLS]  that can be observed on the minus strand of each enhancer element has previously been described as the core of the SEF3-recognition sequence (Allen et\u00a0al., 1989). This DNA binding", " [CLS] BCCP2 and PKp-\u03b21 promoters have led to the identification of enhancing regions of 54 and 79\u00a0bp, respectively, that are essential to direct the activity of these promoters in oil-accumulating tissues of the embryo. Comparison of these enhancer elements using PLACE reveals the presence of shared nucleotide sequences that may constitute putative recognition sequences bound by the transcriptional machinery triggering fatty acid biosynthesis. The hexanucleotide AACCCA [CLS]  that can be observed on the minus strand of each enhancer element has previously been described as the core of the SEF3-recognition sequence (Allen et\u00a0al., 1989). This DNA binding"]]
["seedev_train_822", [" [CLS] BCCP2 and PKp-\u03b21 promoters have led to the identification of enhancing regions of 54 and 79\u00a0bp, respectively, that are essential to direct the activity of these promoters in oil-accumulating tissues of the embryo [CLS] . Comparison of these enhancer elements using PLACE reveals the presence of shared nucleotide sequences that may constitute putative recognition sequences bound by the transcriptional machinery triggering fatty acid biosynthesis.", " [CLS] PKp-\u03b21 promoters have led to the identification of enhancing regions of 54 and 79\u00a0bp, respectively, that are essential to direct the activity of these promoters in oil-accumulating tissues of the embryo [CLS] . Comparison of these enhancer elements using PLACE reveals the presence of shared nucleotide sequences that may constitute putative recognition sequences bound by the transcriptional machinery triggering fatty acid biosynthesis."]]
["seedev_train_823", [" positive regulator of transcription of the \u03b2-conglycinin, \u03b1-subunit gene. SEF3-like activities were reported in seeds of other oleaginous species, such as tobacco and sunflower (Lessard et\u00a0al., 1991). In soybean,  [CLS] SEF3 was shown to bind specifically to a site composed of two AACCCA [CLS]  elements separated by 27\u00a0bp (Allen et\u00a0al., 1989). Nevertheless, complementary studies then established that mutations abolishing the protein binding of this SEF3 factor in\u00a0vitro did not affect the in vivo"]]
["seedev_train_824", [" 1989). This DNA binding factor was identified in nuclear extracts from developing soybean seeds, and was initially presented as a positive regulator of transcription of the \u03b2-conglycinin, \u03b1-subunit gene.  [CLS] SEF3-like activities were reported in seeds of other oleaginous species, such as tobacco and sunflower [CLS]  (Lessard et\u00a0al., 1991). In soybean, SEF3 was shown to bind specifically to a site composed of two AACCCA elements separated by 27\u00a0bp (Allen et\u00a0al., 1989). Nevertheless, complementary studies then", " 1989). This DNA binding factor was identified in nuclear extracts from developing soybean seeds, and was initially presented as a positive regulator of transcription of the \u03b2-conglycinin, \u03b1-subunit gene.  [CLS] SEF3-like activities were reported in seeds of other oleaginous species, such as tobacco [CLS]  and sunflower (Lessard et\u00a0al., 1991). In soybean, SEF3 was shown to bind specifically to a site composed of two AACCCA elements separated by 27\u00a0bp (Allen et\u00a0al., 1989). Nevertheless, complementary"]]
["seedev_train_825", [" a positive regulator of transcription of the \u03b2-conglycinin, \u03b1-subunit gene. SEF3-like activities were reported in seeds of other oleaginous species, such as tobacco and sunflower (Lessard et\u00a0al., 1991). In  [CLS] soybean, SEF3 [CLS]  was shown to bind specifically to a site composed of two AACCCA elements separated by 27\u00a0bp (Allen et\u00a0al., 1989). Nevertheless, complementary studies then established that mutations abolishing the protein"]]
["seedev_train_826", [" a positive regulator of transcription of the \u03b2-conglycinin, \u03b1-subunit gene. SEF3-like activities were reported in seeds of other oleaginous species, such as tobacco and sunflower (Lessard et\u00a0al., 1991). In  [CLS] soybean, SEF3 was shown to bind specifically to a site composed of two AACCCA [CLS]  elements separated by 27\u00a0bp (Allen et\u00a0al., 1989). Nevertheless, complementary studies then established that mutations abolishing the protein binding of this SEF3 factor in\u00a0vitro did not affect the in vivo"]]
["seedev_train_827", [" dcl1-null mutant embryos overexpress \u223c50 miRNA targets. In dcl1 eight-cell embryos, the two most up-regulated targets are those of miR156 and encode SPL10 and SPL11 transcription factors.\nSPL10 and  [CLS] SPL11 are derepressed >150-fold in dcl1 embryos and are redundantly required for the dcl1 early patterning defects [CLS] . Moreover, as early as the eight-cell stage, miR156-mediated repression of zygotic SPL transcripts prevents premature accumulation of transcripts from genes normally induced during the embryonic maturation phase.\n"]]
["seedev_train_828", [" SPL11 transcription factors.\nSPL10 and SPL11 are derepressed >150-fold in dcl1 embryos and are redundantly required for the dcl1 early patterning defects. Moreover, as early as the eight-cell stage,  [CLS] miR156-mediated repression of zygotic SPL transcripts prevents premature accumulation of transcripts from genes normally induced during the embryonic maturation phase [CLS] .\n"]]
["seedev_train_829", [" (\u223c32-cell) stage, dcl1-null mutant embryos overexpress \u223c50 miRNA targets. In dcl1 eight-cell embryos, the two most up-regulated targets are those of miR156 and encode SPL10 and SPL11 transcription factors.\n [CLS] SPL10 and SPL11 are derepressed >150-fold in dcl1 embryos and are redundantly required for the dcl1 early patterning defects [CLS] . Moreover, as early as the eight-cell stage, miR156-mediated repression of zygotic SPL transcripts prevents premature accumulation of transcripts from genes normally induced during the embryonic maturation phase.\n"]]
["seedev_train_830", [" required for microRNA (miRNA) biogenesis, arrest early in development. To assess the functions of embryonic miRNAs,\nwe determined the developmental and molecular consequences of DCL1 loss. We found that  [CLS] DCL1 is required for cell differentiation [CLS]  events as early as the eight-cell stage and soon thereafter for proper division of the\nhypophysis and subprotoderm cells. By the early globular (\u223c32-cell) stage, dcl1-null mutant embryos overexpress"]]
["seedev_train_831", [" [CLS] Arabidopsis embryos lacking DICER-LIKE1 (DCL1), which is required for microRNA (miRNA) biogenesis, arrest early in development [CLS] . To assess the functions of embryonic miRNAs,\nwe determined the developmental and molecular consequences of DCL1 loss. We found that DCL1 is required for cell differentiation events as early"]]
["seedev_train_832", [" required for cell differentiation events as early as the eight-cell stage and soon thereafter for proper division of the\nhypophysis and subprotoderm cells. By the early globular (\u223c32-cell) stage,  [CLS] dcl1-null mutant embryos overexpress \u223c50 miRNA targets [CLS] . In dcl1 eight-cell embryos, the two most up-regulated targets are those of miR156 and encode SPL10 and SPL11 transcription factors.\nSPL10 and SPL11 are derepressed >150-fold in dcl1 embryos", " [CLS] dcl1-null mutant embryos exhibit morphological defects [CLS]  and arrest at the globular stage of development (Schwartz et al. 1994). To identify the earliest dcl1 morphological defects, we systematically analyzed dcl1 embryos throughout early embryogenesis. Because dcl1", " [CLS] dcl1-null mutant embryos exhibit morphological defects and arrest at the globular stage of development [CLS]  (Schwartz et al. 1994). To identify the earliest dcl1 morphological defects, we systematically analyzed dcl1 embryos throughout early embryogenesis. Because dcl1 embryos are not viable, embryos from self-pollinated plants"]]
["seedev_train_833", [" [CLS] DCL1), which is required for microRNA (miRNA) biogenesis [CLS] , arrest early in development. To assess the functions of embryonic miRNAs,\nwe determined the developmental and molecular consequences of DCL1 loss. We found that DCL1 is required for cell"]]
["seedev_train_834", [" [CLS] microRNA (miRNA [CLS] ) biogenesis, arrest early in development. To assess the functions of embryonic miRNAs,\nwe determined the developmental and molecular consequences of DCL1 loss. We found that DCL1 is required for"]]
["seedev_train_835", [" [CLS] DICER-LIKE1 (DCL1 [CLS] ), which is required for microRNA (miRNA) biogenesis, arrest early in development. To assess the functions of embryonic miRNAs,\nwe determined the developmental and molecular consequences of DCL1 loss. We"]]
["seedev_train_836", [" SPL11 transcription factors.\nSPL10 and SPL11 are derepressed >150-fold in dcl1 embryos and are redundantly required for the dcl1 early patterning defects. Moreover, as early as the eight-cell stage,  [CLS] miR156-mediated repression of zygotic SPL transcripts [CLS]  prevents premature accumulation of transcripts from genes normally induced during the embryonic maturation phase.\n"]]
["seedev_train_837", [" eight-cell stage and soon thereafter for proper division of the\nhypophysis and subprotoderm cells. By the early globular (\u223c32-cell) stage, dcl1-null mutant embryos overexpress \u223c50 miRNA targets. In dcl1  [CLS] eight-cell embryos, the two most up-regulated targets are those of miR156 and encode SPL10 [CLS]  and SPL11 transcription factors.\nSPL10 and SPL11 are derepressed >150-fold in dcl1 embryos and are redundantly required for the dcl1 early patterning defects. Moreover, as early as the eight-cell"]]
["seedev_train_838", [" eight-cell stage and soon thereafter for proper division of the\nhypophysis and subprotoderm cells. By the early globular (\u223c32-cell) stage, dcl1-null mutant embryos overexpress \u223c50 miRNA targets. In dcl1  [CLS] eight-cell embryos, the two most up-regulated targets are those of miR156 [CLS]  and encode SPL10 and SPL11 transcription factors.\nSPL10 and SPL11 are derepressed >150-fold in dcl1 embryos and are redundantly required for the dcl1 early patterning defects. Moreover, as early"]]
["seedev_train_839", [" eight-cell stage and soon thereafter for proper division of the\nhypophysis and subprotoderm cells. By the early globular (\u223c32-cell) stage, dcl1-null mutant embryos overexpress \u223c50 miRNA targets. In dcl1  [CLS] eight-cell embryos, the two most up-regulated targets are those of miR156 and encode SPL10 and SPL11 [CLS]  transcription factors.\nSPL10 and SPL11 are derepressed >150-fold in dcl1 embryos and are redundantly required for the dcl1 early patterning defects. Moreover, as early as the eight-cell stage, miR156-mediated"]]
["seedev_train_840", [" the eight-cell stage and soon thereafter for proper division of the\nhypophysis and subprotoderm cells. By the early globular (\u223c32-cell) stage, dcl1-null mutant embryos overexpress \u223c50 miRNA targets. In  [CLS] dcl1 eight-cell embryos, the two most up-regulated targets are those of miR156 and encode SPL10 [CLS]  and SPL11 transcription factors.\nSPL10 and SPL11 are derepressed >150-fold in dcl1 embryos and are redundantly required for the dcl1 early patterning defects. Moreover, as early as the eight-cell"]]
["seedev_train_841", [" the eight-cell stage and soon thereafter for proper division of the\nhypophysis and subprotoderm cells. By the early globular (\u223c32-cell) stage, dcl1-null mutant embryos overexpress \u223c50 miRNA targets. In  [CLS] dcl1 eight-cell embryos, the two most up-regulated targets are those of miR156 [CLS]  and encode SPL10 and SPL11 transcription factors.\nSPL10 and SPL11 are derepressed >150-fold in dcl1 embryos and are redundantly required for the dcl1 early patterning defects. Moreover, as early"]]
["seedev_train_842", [" the eight-cell stage and soon thereafter for proper division of the\nhypophysis and subprotoderm cells. By the early globular (\u223c32-cell) stage, dcl1-null mutant embryos overexpress \u223c50 miRNA targets. In  [CLS] dcl1 eight-cell embryos, the two most up-regulated targets are those of miR156 and encode SPL10 and SPL11 [CLS]  transcription factors.\nSPL10 and SPL11 are derepressed >150-fold in dcl1 embryos and are redundantly required for the dcl1 early patterning defects. Moreover, as early as the eight-cell stage, miR156-mediated"]]
["seedev_train_843", [" dcl1-null mutant embryos overexpress \u223c50 miRNA targets. In dcl1 eight-cell embryos, the two most up-regulated targets are those of miR156 and encode SPL10 and SPL11 transcription factors.\nSPL10 and  [CLS] SPL11 are derepressed >150-fold in dcl1 embryos and are redundantly required for the dcl1 [CLS]  early patterning defects. Moreover, as early as the eight-cell stage, miR156-mediated repression of zygotic SPL transcripts prevents premature accumulation of transcripts from genes normally induced during the embryonic maturation"]]
["seedev_train_844", [" (\u223c32-cell) stage, dcl1-null mutant embryos overexpress \u223c50 miRNA targets. In dcl1 eight-cell embryos, the two most up-regulated targets are those of miR156 and encode SPL10 and SPL11 transcription factors.\n [CLS] SPL10 and SPL11 are derepressed >150-fold in dcl1 embryos and are redundantly required for the dcl1 [CLS]  early patterning defects. Moreover, as early as the eight-cell stage, miR156-mediated repression of zygotic SPL transcripts prevents premature accumulation of transcripts from genes normally induced during the embryonic maturation"]]
["seedev_train_845", [" most up-regulated targets are those of miR156 and encode SPL10 and SPL11 transcription factors.\nSPL10 and SPL11 are derepressed >150-fold in dcl1 embryos and are redundantly required for the  [CLS] dcl1 early patterning defects [CLS] . Moreover, as early as the eight-cell stage, miR156-mediated repression of zygotic SPL transcripts prevents premature accumulation of transcripts from genes normally induced during the embryonic maturation phase.\n", " et al. 2006). Because the auxin signaling-responsive DR5rev promoter fused to GFP (DR5rev\u2237GFP) is specifically active in the hypophysis cells of wild-type globular embryos (Friml et al. 2003), and  [CLS] hypophysis specification is perturbed in dcl1 [CLS]  embryos, we examined the activity of DR5rev\u2237GFP in dcl1-5 embryos to test whether DCL1 was required for appropriate auxin signaling. Although presumptive dcl1-5 hypophysis cells often expressed DR5rev\u2237GFP, cells", " the presumptive hypophysis ectopically expressed DR5rev\u2237GFP\n(Fig. 1B). Therefore, DCL1 is required for the hypophysis-specific increase in auxin signaling. Given the severe subprotodermal defects observed in\ndcl1 embryos, the  [CLS] inappropriate auxin signaling observed in dcl1 [CLS]  embryos was likely due to the incorrect expression of auxin transport and/or auxin signaling factors. Therefore, the auxin\nresponse defects observed in dcl1 embryos were probably secondary consequences of", " cells often expressed DR5rev\u2237GFP, cells located above the presumptive hypophysis ectopically expressed DR5rev\u2237GFP\n(Fig. 1B). Therefore, DCL1 is required for the hypophysis-specific increase in auxin signaling. Given the severe  [CLS] subprotodermal defects observed in\ndcl1 [CLS]  embryos, the inappropriate auxin signaling observed in dcl1 embryos was likely due to the incorrect expression of auxin transport and/or auxin signaling factors. Therefore, the auxin\nresponse defects observed", " in dcl1 globular embryos (Fig. 1B; Supplemental Fig. 2). Considered together with the defective hypophysis cell divisions observed in dcl1 embryos, the lack of hypophysis markers indicates that the  [CLS] hypophysis is misspecified in dcl1 [CLS]  embryos.\nThe plant hormone auxin is transported from the embryo proper to the presumptive hypophysis and contributes to hypophysis\nspecification (Friml et al. 2003; Aida et al. 2004; Weijers", " of 69) of eight-cell and dermatogen stage embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants, suggesting that basal cell lineage differentiation is not perturbed in all preglobular dcl1 embryos (Fig. 1B). Thus,  [CLS] dcl1 embryos had detectable defects in the differentiation of apical cell [CLS]  but not basal cell descendents as early as the eight-cell\nstage.\nTo test whether DCL1 is required for radial patterning, we examined a series of markers that are differentially", " defects observed in\ndcl1 embryos, the inappropriate auxin signaling observed in dcl1 embryos was likely due to the incorrect expression of auxin transport and/or auxin signaling factors. Therefore, the  [CLS] auxin\nresponse defects observed in dcl1 [CLS]  embryos were probably secondary consequences of subprotoderm cell differentiation defects, which in turn were probably due\nto the apical cell lineage defects observed at the preglobular stages.\n", " dcl1-5 suspensors had reduced levels of WOX8 transcripts (Fig. 1B). Furthermore, hypophysis markers were not detectable in dcl1 globular embryos (Fig. 1B; Supplemental Fig. 2). Considered together with the  [CLS] defective hypophysis cell divisions observed in dcl1 [CLS]  embryos, the lack of hypophysis markers indicates that the hypophysis is misspecified in dcl1 embryos.\nThe plant hormone auxin is transported from the embryo proper to the presumptive hypophysis", " DR5rev\u2237GFP\n(Fig. 1B). Therefore, DCL1 is required for the hypophysis-specific increase in auxin signaling. Given the severe subprotodermal defects observed in\ndcl1 embryos, the inappropriate auxin signaling observed in  [CLS] dcl1 embryos was likely due to the incorrect expression of auxin transport and/or auxin signaling factors [CLS] . Therefore, the auxin\nresponse defects observed in dcl1 embryos were probably secondary consequences of subprotoderm cell differentiation defects, which in turn were probably due\nto the apical cell lineage", " of 69) of eight-cell and dermatogen stage embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants, suggesting that basal cell lineage differentiation is not perturbed in all preglobular dcl1 embryos (Fig. 1B). Thus,  [CLS] dcl1 embryos had detectable defects in the differentiation of apical cell but not basal cell [CLS]  descendents as early as the eight-cell\nstage.\nTo test whether DCL1 is required for radial patterning, we examined a series of markers that are differentially expressed along the radial", " the inappropriate auxin signaling observed in dcl1 embryos was likely due to the incorrect expression of auxin transport and/or auxin signaling factors. Therefore, the auxin\nresponse defects observed in  [CLS] dcl1 embryos were probably secondary consequences of subprotoderm cell differentiation defects [CLS] , which in turn were probably due\nto the apical cell lineage defects observed at the preglobular stages.\n"]]
["seedev_train_846", [" found that DCL1 is required for cell differentiation events as early as the eight-cell stage and soon thereafter for proper division of the\nhypophysis and subprotoderm cells. By the  [CLS] early globular (\u223c32-cell) stage, dcl1-null mutant embryos overexpress \u223c50 miRNA targets [CLS] . In dcl1 eight-cell embryos, the two most up-regulated targets are those of miR156 and encode SPL10 and SPL11 transcription factors.\nSPL10 and SPL11 are derepressed >150-fold in dcl1 embryos"]]
["seedev_train_847", [" dcl1-null mutant embryos overexpress \u223c50 miRNA targets. In dcl1 eight-cell embryos, the two most up-regulated targets are those of miR156 and encode SPL10 and SPL11 transcription factors.\nSPL10 and  [CLS] SPL11 are derepressed >150-fold in dcl1 [CLS]  embryos and are redundantly required for the dcl1 early patterning defects. Moreover, as early as the eight-cell stage, miR156-mediated repression of zygotic SPL transcripts prevents premature accumulation of transcripts", " (\u223c32-cell) stage, dcl1-null mutant embryos overexpress \u223c50 miRNA targets. In dcl1 eight-cell embryos, the two most up-regulated targets are those of miR156 and encode SPL10 and SPL11 transcription factors.\n [CLS] SPL10 and SPL11 are derepressed >150-fold in dcl1 [CLS]  embryos and are redundantly required for the dcl1 early patterning defects. Moreover, as early as the eight-cell stage, miR156-mediated repression of zygotic SPL transcripts prevents premature accumulation of transcripts"]]
["seedev_train_848", ["\nSPL10 and SPL11 are derepressed >150-fold in dcl1 embryos and are redundantly required for the dcl1 early patterning defects. Moreover, as early as the eight-cell stage, miR156-mediated repression of  [CLS] zygotic SPL transcripts [CLS]  prevents premature accumulation of transcripts from genes normally induced during the embryonic maturation phase.\n"]]
["seedev_train_849", [" SPL10 and SPL11 transcription factors.\nSPL10 and SPL11 are derepressed >150-fold in dcl1 embryos and are redundantly required for the dcl1 early patterning defects. Moreover, as early as the  [CLS] eight-cell stage, miR156-mediated repression of zygotic SPL transcripts [CLS]  prevents premature accumulation of transcripts from genes normally induced during the embryonic maturation phase.\n"]]
["seedev_train_850", ["\nsuspensor beginning at the heart stage (Schwartz et al. 1994). Our morphological analysis of dcl1 embryos confirmed these findings and revealed previously unreported phenotypes (Fig. 1A). We identified initial  [CLS] morphological defects in the presumptive hypophysis cells (i.e., the suspensor cell most proximal\nto the embryo proper) of 19% (29 of 154) of dermatogen stage embryos from self-pollinated dcl1-5/+ plants [CLS]  (Fig. 1A). By the early globular stage, morphological defects were observed in \u223c25% of embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants (Fig. 1A). These embryos with defects were presumably homozygous for"]]
["seedev_train_851", [" and were developmentally arrested and nonviable\n(Fig. 1A; Schwartz et al. 1994). Furthermore, dcl1-5 homozygous seedlings could not be recovered from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants, which suggested that the developmentally  [CLS] arrested embryos derived from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants [CLS]  were indeed homozygous for dcl1-5 (data not shown). Because embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ and selfed dcl1-10/+ plants exhibited the same morphological defects at indistinguishable frequencies, subsequent analyses focused on", " be recovered from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants, which suggested that the developmentally arrested embryos derived from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants were indeed homozygous for dcl1-5 (data not shown). Because embryos from  [CLS] selfed dcl1-5/+ and selfed dcl1-10/+ plants exhibited the same morphological defects [CLS]  at indistinguishable frequencies, subsequent analyses focused on embryos\nfrom selfed dcl1-5/+ plants (Table 1; data not shown). DCL1 transcripts were detected by quantitative RT\u2013PCT (qRT\u2013PCR) in both early globular", " the suspensor cell most proximal\nto the embryo proper) of 19% (29 of 154) of dermatogen stage embryos from self-pollinated dcl1-5/+ plants (Fig. 1A). By the early globular stage,  [CLS] morphological defects were observed in \u223c25% of embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants [CLS]  (Fig. 1A). These embryos with defects were presumably homozygous for dcl1-5-null alleles, and their defects included abnormal hypophysis cell divisions as well as the previously unreported loss of\npericlinal"]]
["seedev_train_852", [" from selfed dcl1-5/+ and selfed dcl1-10/+ plants exhibited the same morphological defects at indistinguishable frequencies, subsequent analyses focused on embryos\nfrom selfed dcl1-5/+ plants (Table 1; data not shown).  [CLS] DCL1 transcripts were detected by quantitative RT\u2013PCT (qRT\u2013PCR) in both early globular embryos [CLS]  from wild-type plants and early\nglobular embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants that developed normally, but were not detected in abnormal early globular embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants (Supplemental Fig.", " from selfed dcl1-5/+ and selfed dcl1-10/+ plants exhibited the same morphological defects at indistinguishable frequencies, subsequent analyses focused on embryos\nfrom selfed dcl1-5/+ plants (Table 1; data not shown).  [CLS] DCL1 transcripts were detected by quantitative RT\u2013PCT (qRT\u2013PCR) in both early globular embryos from wild-type plants and early\nglobular embryos [CLS]  from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants that developed normally, but were not detected in abnormal early globular embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants (Supplemental Fig. 1). These expression analyses further confirmed that"]]
["seedev_train_853", [" from selfed dcl1-5/+ and selfed dcl1-10/+ plants exhibited the same morphological defects at indistinguishable frequencies, subsequent analyses focused on embryos\nfrom selfed dcl1-5/+ plants (Table 1; data not shown).  [CLS] DCL1 transcripts were detected by quantitative RT\u2013PCT (qRT\u2013PCR) in both early globular embryos from wild-type plants and early\nglobular embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants that developed normally, but were not detected in abnormal early globular embryos [CLS]  from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants (Supplemental Fig. 1). These expression analyses further confirmed that abnormal embryos from selfed dcl1/+ plants were homozygous for dcl1-null alleles.\n"]]
["seedev_train_854", [" from selfed dcl1-5/+ and selfed dcl1-10/+ plants exhibited the same morphological defects at indistinguishable frequencies, subsequent analyses focused on embryos\nfrom selfed dcl1-5/+ plants (Table 1; data not shown).  [CLS] DCL1 transcripts were detected by quantitative RT\u2013PCT (qRT\u2013PCR) in both early globular embryos from wild-type plants [CLS]  and early\nglobular embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants that developed normally, but were not detected in abnormal early globular embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants (Supplemental Fig. 1). These expression", " from selfed dcl1-5/+ and selfed dcl1-10/+ plants exhibited the same morphological defects at indistinguishable frequencies, subsequent analyses focused on embryos\nfrom selfed dcl1-5/+ plants (Table 1; data not shown).  [CLS] DCL1 transcripts were detected by quantitative RT\u2013PCT (qRT\u2013PCR) in both early globular embryos from wild-type plants and early\nglobular embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants [CLS]  that developed normally, but were not detected in abnormal early globular embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants (Supplemental Fig. 1). These expression analyses further confirmed that abnormal embryos from selfed", " from selfed dcl1-5/+ and selfed dcl1-10/+ plants exhibited the same morphological defects at indistinguishable frequencies, subsequent analyses focused on embryos\nfrom selfed dcl1-5/+ plants (Table 1; data not shown).  [CLS] DCL1 transcripts were detected by quantitative RT\u2013PCT (qRT\u2013PCR) in both early globular embryos from wild-type plants and early\nglobular embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants that developed normally, but were not detected in abnormal early globular embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants [CLS]  (Supplemental Fig. 1). These expression analyses further confirmed that abnormal embryos from selfed dcl1/+ plants were homozygous for dcl1-null alleles.\n"]]
["seedev_train_855", [" detected by quantitative RT\u2013PCT (qRT\u2013PCR) in both early globular embryos from wild-type plants and early\nglobular embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants that developed normally, but were not detected in  [CLS] abnormal early globular embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants [CLS]  (Supplemental Fig. 1). These expression analyses further confirmed that abnormal embryos from selfed dcl1/+ plants were homozygous for dcl1-null alleles.\n"]]
["seedev_train_856", [" at the same developmental stage, which enabled an estimate of\ndcl1 embryonic stages based on the morphology of their wild-type siblings. It was reported previously that sus1/dcl1 embryos exhibit  [CLS] abnormal cell divisions at the base of the embryo proper beginning at the globular stage and in the extraembryonic\nsuspensor beginning at the heart stage [CLS]  (Schwartz et al. 1994). Our morphological analysis of dcl1 embryos confirmed these findings and revealed previously unreported phenotypes (Fig. 1A). We identified initial morphological defects in the presumptive hypophysis"]]
["seedev_train_857", [" silique are approximately at the same developmental stage, which enabled an estimate of\ndcl1 embryonic stages based on the morphology of their wild-type siblings. It was reported previously that  [CLS] sus1/dcl1 embryos exhibit abnormal cell divisions [CLS]  at the base of the embryo proper beginning at the globular stage and in the extraembryonic\nsuspensor beginning at the heart stage (Schwartz et al. 1994). Our morphological analysis"]]
["seedev_train_858", [" at the same developmental stage, which enabled an estimate of\ndcl1 embryonic stages based on the morphology of their wild-type siblings. It was reported previously that sus1/dcl1 embryos exhibit  [CLS] abnormal cell divisions at the base of the embryo proper beginning at the globular stage [CLS]  and in the extraembryonic\nsuspensor beginning at the heart stage (Schwartz et al. 1994). Our morphological analysis of dcl1 embryos confirmed these findings and revealed previously unreported phenotypes (Fig."]]
["seedev_train_859", ["\nsuspensor beginning at the heart stage (Schwartz et al. 1994). Our morphological analysis of dcl1 embryos confirmed these findings and revealed previously unreported phenotypes (Fig. 1A). We identified initial  [CLS] morphological defects in the presumptive hypophysis cells [CLS]  (i.e., the suspensor cell most proximal\nto the embryo proper) of 19% (29 of 154) of dermatogen stage embryos from self-pollinated dcl1-5/+ plants (Fig. 1A). By the early globular"]]
["seedev_train_860", ["\nsuspensor beginning at the heart stage (Schwartz et al. 1994). Our morphological analysis of dcl1 embryos confirmed these findings and revealed previously unreported phenotypes (Fig. 1A). We identified initial  [CLS] morphological defects in the presumptive hypophysis cells (i.e., the suspensor cell most proximal\nto the embryo proper) of 19% (29 of 154) of dermatogen stage [CLS]  embryos from self-pollinated dcl1-5/+ plants (Fig. 1A). By the early globular stage, morphological defects were observed in \u223c25% of embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants (Fig. 1A). These embryos with"]]
["seedev_train_861", [" dcl1-5/+ plants (Fig. 1A). By the early globular stage, morphological defects were observed in \u223c25% of embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants (Fig. 1A). These embryos with defects were presumably  [CLS] homozygous for dcl1-5-null alleles, and their defects included abnormal hypophysis cell divisions [CLS]  as well as the previously unreported loss of\npericlinal subprotoderm cell divisions in the embryo proper (Fig. 1A). In subsequent stages, these abnormal embryos did not produce cotyledons and", " dcl1-5/+ plants (Fig. 1A). By the early globular stage, morphological defects were observed in \u223c25% of embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants (Fig. 1A). These embryos with defects were presumably  [CLS] homozygous for dcl1-5-null alleles, and their defects included abnormal hypophysis cell divisions as well as the previously unreported loss of\npericlinal subprotoderm cell divisions in the embryo proper [CLS]  (Fig. 1A). In subsequent stages, these abnormal embryos did not produce cotyledons and were developmentally arrested and nonviable\n(Fig. 1A; Schwartz et al. 1994). Furthermore, dcl1-5 homozygous seedlings could"]]
["seedev_train_862", [" selfed dcl1-5/+ plants, which suggested that the developmentally arrested embryos derived from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants were indeed homozygous for dcl1-5 (data not shown). Because embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ and  [CLS] selfed dcl1-10/+ plants exhibited the same morphological defects [CLS]  at indistinguishable frequencies, subsequent analyses focused on embryos\nfrom selfed dcl1-5/+ plants (Table 1; data not shown). DCL1 transcripts were detected by quantitative RT\u2013PCT (qRT\u2013PCR) in both early globular"]]
["seedev_train_863", [" hypophysis cells (i.e., the suspensor cell most proximal\nto the embryo proper) of 19% (29 of 154) of dermatogen stage embryos from self-pollinated dcl1-5/+ plants (Fig. 1A). By the  [CLS] early globular stage, morphological defects [CLS]  were observed in \u223c25% of embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants (Fig. 1A). These embryos with defects were presumably homozygous for dcl1-5-null alleles, and their defects included abnormal hypophysis cell"]]
["seedev_train_864", [" defects observed in\ndcl1 embryos, the inappropriate auxin signaling observed in dcl1 embryos was likely due to the incorrect expression of auxin transport and/or auxin signaling factors. Therefore, the  [CLS] auxin\nresponse defects observed in dcl1 embryos were probably secondary consequences of subprotoderm cell differentiation defects [CLS] , which in turn were probably due\nto the apical cell lineage defects observed at the preglobular stages.\n"]]
["seedev_train_865", [" previously reported ectopic localization of embryo proper-specific\nstarch grains and protein bodies in the suspensors of late stage sus1/dcl1 embryos (Schwartz et al. 1994). Consistent with the reduction/loss of  [CLS] subprotodermal cell divisions in dcl1 late globular/early heart stage embryos [CLS] , we detected reduced levels of RPS5A transcripts in these cell types (Supplemental Fig. 2). Moreover, vascular primordium and ground tissue initial markers were\nabsent from these cell types (Supplemental"]]
["seedev_train_866", [" test whether DCL1 was required for appropriate auxin signaling. Although presumptive dcl1-5 hypophysis cells often expressed DR5rev\u2237GFP, cells located above the presumptive hypophysis ectopically expressed DR5rev\u2237GFP\n(Fig. 1B). Therefore,  [CLS] DCL1 is required for the hypophysis-specific increase in auxin signaling [CLS] . Given the severe subprotodermal defects observed in\ndcl1 embryos, the inappropriate auxin signaling observed in dcl1 embryos was likely due to the incorrect expression of auxin transport and/or auxin"]]
["seedev_train_867", [" embryos was likely due to the incorrect expression of auxin transport and/or auxin signaling factors. Therefore, the auxin\nresponse defects observed in dcl1 embryos were probably secondary consequences of  [CLS] subprotoderm cell differentiation defects, which in turn were probably due\nto the apical cell lineage defects [CLS]  observed at the preglobular stages.\n"]]
["seedev_train_868", [" 2003), and hypophysis specification is perturbed in dcl1 embryos, we examined the activity of DR5rev\u2237GFP in dcl1-5 embryos to test whether DCL1 was required for appropriate auxin signaling. Although  [CLS] presumptive dcl1-5 hypophysis cells often expressed DR5rev\u2237GFP [CLS] , cells located above the presumptive hypophysis ectopically expressed DR5rev\u2237GFP\n(Fig. 1B). Therefore, DCL1 is required for the hypophysis-specific increase in auxin signaling. Given the severe subprotodermal defects observed in"]]
["seedev_train_869", [" is transported from the embryo proper to the presumptive hypophysis and contributes to hypophysis\nspecification (Friml et al. 2003; Aida et al. 2004; Weijers et al. 2006). Because the  [CLS] auxin signaling-responsive DR5rev promoter [CLS]  fused to GFP (DR5rev\u2237GFP) is specifically active in the hypophysis cells of wild-type globular embryos (Friml et al. 2003), and hypophysis specification is perturbed in dcl1 embryos, we examined"]]
["seedev_train_870", [" as early as the eight-cell\nstage.\nTo test whether DCL1 is required for radial patterning, we examined a series of markers that are differentially expressed along the radial axis.\n [CLS] A. thaliana MERISTEM LAYER1 (ATML1 [CLS] ) and PROTODERMAL FACTOR1 (PDF1) transcripts are detectable in the protoderm, but not the subprotoderm, of globular stage embryos (Lu et al. 1996; Abe et al. 1999). ATML1 and PDF1"]]
["seedev_train_871", ["\nTo test whether DCL1 is required for radial patterning, we examined a series of markers that are differentially expressed along the radial axis.\nA. thaliana MERISTEM LAYER1 (ATML1) and  [CLS] PROTODERMAL FACTOR1 (PDF1 [CLS] ) transcripts are detectable in the protoderm, but not the subprotoderm, of globular stage embryos (Lu et al. 1996; Abe et al. 1999). ATML1 and PDF1 transcripts were appropriately localized"]]
["seedev_train_872", [" from the embryo proper to the presumptive hypophysis and contributes to hypophysis\nspecification (Friml et al. 2003; Aida et al. 2004; Weijers et al. 2006). Because the auxin signaling-responsive  [CLS] DR5rev promoter fused to GFP (DR5rev\u2237GFP [CLS] ) is specifically active in the hypophysis cells of wild-type globular embryos (Friml et al. 2003), and hypophysis specification is perturbed in dcl1 embryos, we examined the activity of DR5rev\u2237GFP"]]
["seedev_train_873", [" [CLS] WUSCHEL-related HOMEOBOX2 (WOX2 [CLS] ) transcripts are localized in the apical cell lineage of wild-type preglobular embryos (Haecker et al. 2004). After the two/four-cell stage, WOX2 transcripts were not detected in about a quarter"]]
["seedev_train_874", [" whether DCL1 is required for radial patterning, we examined a series of markers that are differentially expressed along the radial axis.\nA. thaliana MERISTEM LAYER1 (ATML1) and PROTODERMAL FACTOR1 ( [CLS] PDF1) transcripts are detectable in the protoderm [CLS] , but not the subprotoderm, of globular stage embryos (Lu et al. 1996; Abe et al. 1999). ATML1 and PDF1 transcripts were appropriately localized to the protoderm of globular stage", " (ATML1) and PROTODERMAL FACTOR1 (PDF1) transcripts are detectable in the protoderm, but not the subprotoderm, of globular stage embryos (Lu et al. 1996; Abe et al. 1999). ATML1 and  [CLS] PDF1 transcripts were appropriately localized to the protoderm of globular stage dcl1-5 embryos, but were ectopically localized in the suspensors [CLS]  of dcl1-5 embryos whose wild-type siblings were at the early heart stage (Fig. 1B; Supplemental Fig. 2). This observation was consistent with the previously reported ectopic localization of embryo", " whether DCL1 is required for radial patterning, we examined a series of markers that are differentially expressed along the radial axis.\nA. thaliana MERISTEM LAYER1 (ATML1) and PROTODERMAL FACTOR1 ( [CLS] PDF1) transcripts are detectable in the protoderm, but not the subprotoderm [CLS] , of globular stage embryos (Lu et al. 1996; Abe et al. 1999). ATML1 and PDF1 transcripts were appropriately localized to the protoderm of globular stage dcl1-5 embryos, but were", " (ATML1) and PROTODERMAL FACTOR1 (PDF1) transcripts are detectable in the protoderm, but not the subprotoderm, of globular stage embryos (Lu et al. 1996; Abe et al. 1999). ATML1 and  [CLS] PDF1 transcripts were appropriately localized to the protoderm [CLS]  of globular stage dcl1-5 embryos, but were ectopically localized in the suspensors of dcl1-5 embryos whose wild-type siblings were at the early heart stage (Fig. 1B; Supplemental Fig. 2)."]]
["seedev_train_875", [" primordium and ground tissue initial markers were\nabsent from these cell types (Supplemental Fig. 2).\nIn addition to the ectopic localization of protoderm markers in the suspensor, globular dcl1-5  [CLS] suspensors had reduced levels of WOX8 transcripts [CLS]  (Fig. 1B). Furthermore, hypophysis markers were not detectable in dcl1 globular embryos (Fig. 1B; Supplemental Fig. 2). Considered together with the defective hypophysis cell divisions observed in dcl1 embryos,", " had detectable levels of PNH transcripts, suggesting that apical cell fate is not completely abolished in all preglobular dcl1 embryos (Supplemental Fig. 2).\nIn contrast to WOX2 and PNH,  [CLS] WOX8 transcripts are localized to the basal cell lineage [CLS]  of preglobular wild-type embryos (Haecker et al. 2004). WOX8 transcripts were detected in 90% (62 of 69) of eight-cell and dermatogen stage embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants, suggesting that", " preglobular dcl1 embryos (Supplemental Fig. 2).\nIn contrast to WOX2 and PNH, WOX8 transcripts are localized to the basal cell lineage of preglobular wild-type embryos (Haecker et al. 2004).  [CLS] WOX8 transcripts were detected in 90% (62 of 69) of eight-cell and dermatogen stage embryos [CLS]  from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants, suggesting that basal cell lineage differentiation is not perturbed in all preglobular dcl1 embryos (Fig. 1B). Thus, dcl1 embryos had detectable defects in the differentiation"]]
["seedev_train_876", [" plants had detectable levels of PNH transcripts, suggesting that apical cell fate is not completely abolished in all preglobular dcl1 embryos (Supplemental Fig. 2).\nIn contrast to WOX2 and  [CLS] PNH, WOX8 transcripts are localized to the basal cell lineage [CLS]  of preglobular wild-type embryos (Haecker et al. 2004). WOX8 transcripts were detected in 90% (62 of 69) of eight-cell and dermatogen stage embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants, suggesting that", " hereafter referred to as PNH, are localized in the apical cell lineage of preglobular embryos (Lynn et al. 1999). Approximately 89% (72 of 81) of eight-cell and dermatogen stage  [CLS] embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants had detectable levels of PNH transcripts [CLS] , suggesting that apical cell fate is not completely abolished in all preglobular dcl1 embryos (Supplemental Fig. 2).\nIn contrast to WOX2 and PNH, WOX8 transcripts are localized to the"]]
["seedev_train_877", [" dcl1-5 embryos whose wild-type siblings were at the early heart stage (Fig. 1B; Supplemental Fig. 2). This observation was consistent with the previously reported ectopic localization of embryo proper-specific\n [CLS] starch grains and protein bodies in the suspensors [CLS]  of late stage sus1/dcl1 embryos (Schwartz et al. 1994). Consistent with the reduction/loss of subprotodermal cell divisions in dcl1 late globular/early heart stage embryos, we detected reduced levels of"]]
["seedev_train_878", [" [CLS] WOX2) transcripts are localized in the apical cell lineage of wild-type preglobular embryos [CLS]  (Haecker et al. 2004). After the two/four-cell stage, WOX2 transcripts were not detected in about a quarter of eight-cell and dermatogen stage embryos (seven of 35 and 14 of", " of cell-specific markers in dcl1-5 embryos. WUSCHEL-related HOMEOBOX2 (WOX2) transcripts are localized in the apical cell lineage of wild-type preglobular embryos (Haecker et al. 2004). After the two/four-cell stage,  [CLS] WOX2 transcripts were not detected in about a quarter of eight-cell and dermatogen stage embryos [CLS]  (seven of 35 and 14 of 52, respectively)\nfrom self-pollinated dcl1-5/+ plants (Fig. 1B), which implied that dcl1-5 embryos had undetectable WOX2 expression. Similar to WOX2, PINHEAD/ZWILLE/ARGONAUTE10 transcripts, hereafter", " selfed dcl1-5/+ plants had detectable levels of PNH transcripts, suggesting that apical cell fate is not completely abolished in all preglobular dcl1 embryos (Supplemental Fig. 2).\nIn contrast to  [CLS] WOX2 and PNH, WOX8 transcripts are localized to the basal cell lineage [CLS]  of preglobular wild-type embryos (Haecker et al. 2004). WOX8 transcripts were detected in 90% (62 of 69) of eight-cell and dermatogen stage embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants, suggesting that"]]
["seedev_train_879", [" and protein bodies in the suspensors of late stage sus1/dcl1 embryos (Schwartz et al. 1994). Consistent with the reduction/loss of subprotodermal cell divisions in dcl1 late globular/early heart stage  [CLS] embryos, we detected reduced levels of RPS5A transcripts [CLS]  in these cell types (Supplemental Fig. 2). Moreover, vascular primordium and ground tissue initial markers were\nabsent from these cell types (Supplemental Fig. 2).\nIn addition to the ectopic"]]
["seedev_train_880", [" eight-cell\nstage.\nTo test whether DCL1 is required for radial patterning, we examined a series of markers that are differentially expressed along the radial axis.\nA. thaliana MERISTEM LAYER1 ( [CLS] ATML1) and PROTODERMAL FACTOR1 (PDF1) transcripts are detectable in the protoderm [CLS] , but not the subprotoderm, of globular stage embryos (Lu et al. 1996; Abe et al. 1999). ATML1 and PDF1 transcripts were appropriately localized to the protoderm of globular stage", " MERISTEM LAYER1 (ATML1) and PROTODERMAL FACTOR1 (PDF1) transcripts are detectable in the protoderm, but not the subprotoderm, of globular stage embryos (Lu et al. 1996; Abe et al. 1999).  [CLS] ATML1 and PDF1 transcripts were appropriately localized to the protoderm of globular stage dcl1-5 embryos, but were ectopically localized in the suspensors [CLS]  of dcl1-5 embryos whose wild-type siblings were at the early heart stage (Fig. 1B; Supplemental Fig. 2). This observation was consistent with the previously reported ectopic localization of embryo", " eight-cell\nstage.\nTo test whether DCL1 is required for radial patterning, we examined a series of markers that are differentially expressed along the radial axis.\nA. thaliana MERISTEM LAYER1 ( [CLS] ATML1) and PROTODERMAL FACTOR1 (PDF1) transcripts are detectable in the protoderm, but not the subprotoderm [CLS] , of globular stage embryos (Lu et al. 1996; Abe et al. 1999). ATML1 and PDF1 transcripts were appropriately localized to the protoderm of globular stage dcl1-5 embryos, but were", " MERISTEM LAYER1 (ATML1) and PROTODERMAL FACTOR1 (PDF1) transcripts are detectable in the protoderm, but not the subprotoderm, of globular stage embryos (Lu et al. 1996; Abe et al. 1999).  [CLS] ATML1 and PDF1 transcripts were appropriately localized to the protoderm [CLS]  of globular stage dcl1-5 embryos, but were ectopically localized in the suspensors of dcl1-5 embryos whose wild-type siblings were at the early heart stage (Fig. 1B; Supplemental Fig. 2)."]]
["seedev_train_881", [" dermatogen stage embryos (seven of 35 and 14 of 52, respectively)\nfrom self-pollinated dcl1-5/+ plants (Fig. 1B), which implied that dcl1-5 embryos had undetectable WOX2 expression. Similar to WOX2,  [CLS] PINHEAD/ZWILLE/ARGONAUTE10 transcripts, hereafter referred to as PNH, are localized in the apical cell lineage [CLS]  of preglobular embryos (Lynn et al. 1999). Approximately 89% (72 of 81) of eight-cell and dermatogen stage embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants had detectable levels of PNH transcripts, suggesting"]]
["seedev_train_882", [" dermatogen stage embryos (seven of 35 and 14 of 52, respectively)\nfrom self-pollinated dcl1-5/+ plants (Fig. 1B), which implied that dcl1-5 embryos had undetectable WOX2 expression. Similar to WOX2, PINHEAD/ZWILLE/ [CLS] ARGONAUTE10 transcripts, hereafter referred to as PNH, are localized in the apical cell lineage [CLS]  of preglobular embryos (Lynn et al. 1999). Approximately 89% (72 of 81) of eight-cell and dermatogen stage embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants had detectable levels of PNH transcripts, suggesting"]]
["seedev_train_883", [" dermatogen stage embryos (seven of 35 and 14 of 52, respectively)\nfrom self-pollinated dcl1-5/+ plants (Fig. 1B), which implied that dcl1-5 embryos had undetectable WOX2 expression. Similar to WOX2, PINHEAD/ [CLS] ZWILLE/ARGONAUTE10 transcripts, hereafter referred to as PNH, are localized in the apical cell lineage [CLS]  of preglobular embryos (Lynn et al. 1999). Approximately 89% (72 of 81) of eight-cell and dermatogen stage embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants had detectable levels of PNH transcripts, suggesting"]]
["seedev_train_884", [" wild-type siblings were at the early heart stage (Fig. 1B; Supplemental Fig. 2). This observation was consistent with the previously reported ectopic localization of embryo proper-specific\nstarch grains and  [CLS] protein bodies in the suspensors [CLS]  of late stage sus1/dcl1 embryos (Schwartz et al. 1994). Consistent with the reduction/loss of subprotodermal cell divisions in dcl1 late globular/early heart stage embryos, we detected reduced levels of"]]
["seedev_train_885", [" Considered together with the defective hypophysis cell divisions observed in dcl1 embryos, the lack of hypophysis markers indicates that the hypophysis is misspecified in dcl1 embryos.\nThe plant hormone  [CLS] auxin is transported from the embryo proper [CLS]  to the presumptive hypophysis and contributes to hypophysis\nspecification (Friml et al. 2003; Aida et al. 2004; Weijers et al. 2006). Because the auxin signaling-responsive DR5rev promoter fused to", " is transported from the embryo proper to the presumptive hypophysis and contributes to hypophysis\nspecification (Friml et al. 2003; Aida et al. 2004; Weijers et al. 2006). Because the  [CLS] auxin signaling-responsive DR5rev promoter fused to GFP (DR5rev\u2237GFP) is specifically active in the hypophysis cells of wild-type globular embryos [CLS]  (Friml et al. 2003), and hypophysis specification is perturbed in dcl1 embryos, we examined the activity of DR5rev\u2237GFP in dcl1-5 embryos to test whether DCL1 was required for appropriate"]]
["seedev_train_886", [" vascular primordium and ground tissue initial markers were\nabsent from these cell types (Supplemental Fig. 2).\nIn addition to the ectopic localization of protoderm markers in the suspensor, globular  [CLS] dcl1-5 suspensors had reduced levels of WOX8 transcripts [CLS]  (Fig. 1B). Furthermore, hypophysis markers were not detectable in dcl1 globular embryos (Fig. 1B; Supplemental Fig. 2). Considered together with the defective hypophysis cell divisions observed in dcl1 embryos,", " had detectable levels of PNH transcripts, suggesting that apical cell fate is not completely abolished in all preglobular dcl1 embryos (Supplemental Fig. 2).\nIn contrast to WOX2 and PNH,  [CLS] WOX8 transcripts are localized to the basal cell lineage of preglobular wild-type [CLS]  embryos (Haecker et al. 2004). WOX8 transcripts were detected in 90% (62 of 69) of eight-cell and dermatogen stage embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants, suggesting that basal cell lineage", " preglobular dcl1 embryos (Supplemental Fig. 2).\nIn contrast to WOX2 and PNH, WOX8 transcripts are localized to the basal cell lineage of preglobular wild-type embryos (Haecker et al. 2004).  [CLS] WOX8 transcripts were detected in 90% (62 of 69) of eight-cell and dermatogen stage embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants [CLS] , suggesting that basal cell lineage differentiation is not perturbed in all preglobular dcl1 embryos (Fig. 1B). Thus, dcl1 embryos had detectable defects in the differentiation of apical cell but"]]
["seedev_train_887", [" plants had detectable levels of PNH transcripts, suggesting that apical cell fate is not completely abolished in all preglobular dcl1 embryos (Supplemental Fig. 2).\nIn contrast to WOX2 and  [CLS] PNH, WOX8 transcripts are localized to the basal cell lineage of preglobular wild-type [CLS]  embryos (Haecker et al. 2004). WOX8 transcripts were detected in 90% (62 of 69) of eight-cell and dermatogen stage embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants, suggesting that basal cell lineage", " to as PNH, are localized in the apical cell lineage of preglobular embryos (Lynn et al. 1999). Approximately 89% (72 of 81) of eight-cell and dermatogen stage embryos from  [CLS] selfed dcl1-5/+ plants had detectable levels of PNH transcripts [CLS] , suggesting that apical cell fate is not completely abolished in all preglobular dcl1 embryos (Supplemental Fig. 2).\nIn contrast to WOX2 and PNH, WOX8 transcripts are localized to the"]]
["seedev_train_888", [" [CLS] WOX2) transcripts are localized in the apical cell lineage of wild-type preglobular embryos [CLS]  (Haecker et al. 2004). After the two/four-cell stage, WOX2 transcripts were not detected in about a quarter of eight-cell and dermatogen stage embryos (seven of 35 and 14 of", " of cell-specific markers in dcl1-5 embryos. WUSCHEL-related HOMEOBOX2 (WOX2) transcripts are localized in the apical cell lineage of wild-type preglobular embryos (Haecker et al. 2004). After the two/four-cell stage,  [CLS] WOX2 transcripts were not detected in about a quarter of eight-cell and dermatogen stage embryos (seven of 35 and 14 of 52, respectively)\nfrom self-pollinated dcl1-5/+ plants [CLS]  (Fig. 1B), which implied that dcl1-5 embryos had undetectable WOX2 expression. Similar to WOX2, PINHEAD/ZWILLE/ARGONAUTE10 transcripts, hereafter referred to as PNH, are localized in the apical cell lineage of", " selfed dcl1-5/+ plants had detectable levels of PNH transcripts, suggesting that apical cell fate is not completely abolished in all preglobular dcl1 embryos (Supplemental Fig. 2).\nIn contrast to  [CLS] WOX2 and PNH, WOX8 transcripts are localized to the basal cell lineage of preglobular wild-type [CLS]  embryos (Haecker et al. 2004). WOX8 transcripts were detected in 90% (62 of 69) of eight-cell and dermatogen stage embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants, suggesting that basal cell lineage"]]
["seedev_train_889", [" of embryo proper-specific\nstarch grains and protein bodies in the suspensors of late stage sus1/dcl1 embryos (Schwartz et al. 1994). Consistent with the reduction/loss of subprotodermal cell divisions in  [CLS] dcl1 late globular/early heart stage embryos, we detected reduced levels of RPS5A transcripts [CLS]  in these cell types (Supplemental Fig. 2). Moreover, vascular primordium and ground tissue initial markers were\nabsent from these cell types (Supplemental Fig. 2).\nIn addition to the ectopic"]]
["seedev_train_890", [" (ATML1) and PROTODERMAL FACTOR1 (PDF1) transcripts are detectable in the protoderm, but not the subprotoderm, of globular stage embryos (Lu et al. 1996; Abe et al. 1999). ATML1 and  [CLS] PDF1 transcripts were appropriately localized to the protoderm of globular stage dcl1-5 embryos, but were ectopically localized in the suspensors of dcl1-5 [CLS]  embryos whose wild-type siblings were at the early heart stage (Fig. 1B; Supplemental Fig. 2). This observation was consistent with the previously reported ectopic localization of embryo proper-specific\nstarch", " as early as the eight-cell\nstage.\nTo test whether DCL1 is required for radial patterning, we examined a series of markers that are differentially expressed along the radial axis.\n [CLS] A. thaliana MERISTEM LAYER1 (ATML1) and PROTODERMAL FACTOR1 (PDF1) transcripts [CLS]  are detectable in the protoderm, but not the subprotoderm, of globular stage embryos (Lu et al. 1996; Abe et al. 1999). ATML1 and PDF1 transcripts were appropriately localized to", " (ATML1) and PROTODERMAL FACTOR1 (PDF1) transcripts are detectable in the protoderm, but not the subprotoderm, of globular stage embryos (Lu et al. 1996; Abe et al. 1999). ATML1 and  [CLS] PDF1 transcripts were appropriately localized to the protoderm of globular stage dcl1-5 [CLS]  embryos, but were ectopically localized in the suspensors of dcl1-5 embryos whose wild-type siblings were at the early heart stage (Fig. 1B; Supplemental Fig. 2). This observation was consistent"]]
["seedev_train_891", [" MERISTEM LAYER1 (ATML1) and PROTODERMAL FACTOR1 (PDF1) transcripts are detectable in the protoderm, but not the subprotoderm, of globular stage embryos (Lu et al. 1996; Abe et al. 1999).  [CLS] ATML1 and PDF1 transcripts were appropriately localized to the protoderm of globular stage dcl1-5 embryos, but were ectopically localized in the suspensors of dcl1-5 [CLS]  embryos whose wild-type siblings were at the early heart stage (Fig. 1B; Supplemental Fig. 2). This observation was consistent with the previously reported ectopic localization of embryo proper-specific\nstarch", " as early as the eight-cell\nstage.\nTo test whether DCL1 is required for radial patterning, we examined a series of markers that are differentially expressed along the radial axis.\n [CLS] A. thaliana MERISTEM LAYER1 (ATML1) and PROTODERMAL FACTOR1 (PDF1) transcripts [CLS]  are detectable in the protoderm, but not the subprotoderm, of globular stage embryos (Lu et al. 1996; Abe et al. 1999). ATML1 and PDF1 transcripts were appropriately localized to", " MERISTEM LAYER1 (ATML1) and PROTODERMAL FACTOR1 (PDF1) transcripts are detectable in the protoderm, but not the subprotoderm, of globular stage embryos (Lu et al. 1996; Abe et al. 1999).  [CLS] ATML1 and PDF1 transcripts were appropriately localized to the protoderm of globular stage dcl1-5 [CLS]  embryos, but were ectopically localized in the suspensors of dcl1-5 embryos whose wild-type siblings were at the early heart stage (Fig. 1B; Supplemental Fig. 2). This observation was consistent"]]
["seedev_train_892", [" dcl1-5 embryos whose wild-type siblings were at the early heart stage (Fig. 1B; Supplemental Fig. 2). This observation was consistent with the previously reported ectopic localization of embryo proper-specific\n [CLS] starch grains and protein bodies in the suspensors of late stage sus1 [CLS] /dcl1 embryos (Schwartz et al. 1994). Consistent with the reduction/loss of subprotodermal cell divisions in dcl1 late globular/early heart stage embryos, we detected reduced levels of RPS5A transcripts in these"]]
["seedev_train_893", [" wild-type siblings were at the early heart stage (Fig. 1B; Supplemental Fig. 2). This observation was consistent with the previously reported ectopic localization of embryo proper-specific\nstarch grains and  [CLS] protein bodies in the suspensors of late stage sus1 [CLS] /dcl1 embryos (Schwartz et al. 1994). Consistent with the reduction/loss of subprotodermal cell divisions in dcl1 late globular/early heart stage embryos, we detected reduced levels of RPS5A transcripts in these"]]
["seedev_train_894", [" Fig. 2). Considered together with the defective hypophysis cell divisions observed in dcl1 embryos, the lack of hypophysis markers indicates that the hypophysis is misspecified in dcl1 embryos.\nThe  [CLS] plant hormone auxin [CLS]  is transported from the embryo proper to the presumptive hypophysis and contributes to hypophysis\nspecification (Friml et al. 2003; Aida et al. 2004; Weijers et al. 2006). Because the", " is transported from the embryo proper to the presumptive hypophysis and contributes to hypophysis\nspecification (Friml et al. 2003; Aida et al. 2004; Weijers et al. 2006). Because the  [CLS] auxin signaling-responsive DR5rev promoter fused to GFP (DR5rev\u2237GFP) is specifically active in the hypophysis cells of wild-type [CLS]  globular embryos (Friml et al. 2003), and hypophysis specification is perturbed in dcl1 embryos, we examined the activity of DR5rev\u2237GFP in dcl1-5 embryos to test whether DCL1 was required"]]
["seedev_train_895", [" the inappropriate auxin signaling observed in dcl1 embryos was likely due to the incorrect expression of auxin transport and/or auxin signaling factors. Therefore, the auxin\nresponse defects observed in  [CLS] dcl1 embryos were probably secondary consequences of subprotoderm cell differentiation defects [CLS] , which in turn were probably due\nto the apical cell lineage defects observed at the preglobular stages.\n"]]
["seedev_train_896", [" the inappropriate auxin signaling observed in dcl1 embryos was likely due to the incorrect expression of auxin transport and/or auxin signaling factors. Therefore, the auxin\nresponse defects observed in  [CLS] dcl1 embryos were probably secondary consequences of subprotoderm cell differentiation defects, which in turn were probably due\nto the apical cell lineage defects [CLS]  observed at the preglobular stages.\n"]]
["seedev_train_897", [" inappropriate auxin signaling observed in dcl1 embryos was likely due to the incorrect expression of auxin transport and/or auxin signaling factors. Therefore, the auxin\nresponse defects observed in dcl1  [CLS] embryos were probably secondary consequences of subprotoderm cell differentiation defects [CLS] , which in turn were probably due\nto the apical cell lineage defects observed at the preglobular stages.\n"]]
["seedev_train_898", [" inappropriate auxin signaling observed in dcl1 embryos was likely due to the incorrect expression of auxin transport and/or auxin signaling factors. Therefore, the auxin\nresponse defects observed in dcl1  [CLS] embryos were probably secondary consequences of subprotoderm cell differentiation defects, which in turn were probably due\nto the apical cell lineage defects [CLS]  observed at the preglobular stages.\n"]]
["seedev_train_899", [" is transported from the embryo proper to the presumptive hypophysis and contributes to hypophysis\nspecification (Friml et al. 2003; Aida et al. 2004; Weijers et al. 2006). Because the  [CLS] auxin signaling-responsive DR5rev promoter fused to GFP (DR5rev\u2237GFP) is specifically active in the hypophysis cells of wild-type globular [CLS]  embryos (Friml et al. 2003), and hypophysis specification is perturbed in dcl1 embryos, we examined the activity of DR5rev\u2237GFP in dcl1-5 embryos to test whether DCL1 was required for"]]
["seedev_train_900", [" auxin signaling factors. Therefore, the auxin\nresponse defects observed in dcl1 embryos were probably secondary consequences of subprotoderm cell differentiation defects, which in turn were probably due\nto the  [CLS] apical cell lineage defects observed at the preglobular stages [CLS] .\n"]]
["seedev_train_901", [" previously reported ectopic localization of embryo proper-specific\nstarch grains and protein bodies in the suspensors of late stage sus1/dcl1 embryos (Schwartz et al. 1994). Consistent with the reduction/loss of  [CLS] subprotodermal cell divisions in dcl1 [CLS]  late globular/early heart stage embryos, we detected reduced levels of RPS5A transcripts in these cell types (Supplemental Fig. 2). Moreover, vascular primordium and ground tissue initial markers were\nabsent"]]
["seedev_train_902", [" and dermatogen stage embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants, suggesting that basal cell lineage differentiation is not perturbed in all preglobular dcl1 embryos (Fig. 1B). Thus, dcl1 embryos had detectable  [CLS] defects in the differentiation of apical cell but not basal cell descendents as early as the eight-cell\nstage [CLS] .\nTo test whether DCL1 is required for radial patterning, we examined a series of markers that are differentially expressed along the radial axis.\nA. thaliana MERISTEM LAYER1 (ATML1) and", " and dermatogen stage embryos from selfed dcl1-5/+ plants, suggesting that basal cell lineage differentiation is not perturbed in all preglobular dcl1 embryos (Fig. 1B). Thus, dcl1 embryos had detectable  [CLS] defects in the differentiation of apical cell but not basal cell descendents as early as the eight-cell\nstage [CLS] .\nTo test whether DCL1 is required for radial patterning, we examined a series of markers that are differentially expressed along the radial axis.\nA. thaliana MERISTEM LAYER1 (ATML1) and"]]
["seedev_train_903", [" embryos was likely due to the incorrect expression of auxin transport and/or auxin signaling factors. Therefore, the auxin\nresponse defects observed in dcl1 embryos were probably secondary consequences of  [CLS] subprotoderm cell differentiation defects, which in turn were probably due\nto the apical cell lineage defects observed at the preglobular stages [CLS] .\n"]]
["seedev_train_904", [" and hypophysis specification is perturbed in dcl1 embryos, we examined the activity of DR5rev\u2237GFP in dcl1-5 embryos to test whether DCL1 was required for appropriate auxin signaling. Although presumptive  [CLS] dcl1-5 hypophysis cells often expressed DR5rev\u2237GFP [CLS] , cells located above the presumptive hypophysis ectopically expressed DR5rev\u2237GFP\n(Fig. 1B). Therefore, DCL1 is required for the hypophysis-specific increase in auxin signaling. Given the severe subprotodermal defects observed in", " not detected in about a quarter of eight-cell and dermatogen stage embryos (seven of 35 and 14 of 52, respectively)\nfrom self-pollinated dcl1-5/+ plants (Fig. 1B), which implied that  [CLS] dcl1-5 embryos had undetectable WOX2 [CLS]  expression. Similar to WOX2, PINHEAD/ZWILLE/ARGONAUTE10 transcripts, hereafter referred to as PNH, are localized in the apical cell lineage of preglobular embryos (Lynn et al. 1999). Approximately 89% (72 of"]]
["seedev_train_905", [" from the embryo proper to the presumptive hypophysis and contributes to hypophysis\nspecification (Friml et al. 2003; Aida et al. 2004; Weijers et al. 2006). Because the auxin signaling-responsive  [CLS] DR5rev promoter fused to GFP (DR5rev\u2237GFP) is specifically active in the hypophysis cells of wild-type [CLS]  globular embryos (Friml et al. 2003), and hypophysis specification is perturbed in dcl1 embryos, we examined the activity of DR5rev\u2237GFP in dcl1-5 embryos to test whether DCL1 was required"]]
["seedev_train_906", [" from the embryo proper to the presumptive hypophysis and contributes to hypophysis\nspecification (Friml et al. 2003; Aida et al. 2004; Weijers et al. 2006). Because the auxin signaling-responsive  [CLS] DR5rev promoter fused to GFP (DR5rev\u2237GFP) is specifically active in the hypophysis cells of wild-type globular embryos [CLS]  (Friml et al. 2003), and hypophysis specification is perturbed in dcl1 embryos, we examined the activity of DR5rev\u2237GFP in dcl1-5 embryos to test whether DCL1 was required for appropriate"]]
["seedev_train_907", [" from the embryo proper to the presumptive hypophysis and contributes to hypophysis\nspecification (Friml et al. 2003; Aida et al. 2004; Weijers et al. 2006). Because the auxin signaling-responsive  [CLS] DR5rev promoter fused to GFP (DR5rev\u2237GFP) is specifically active in the hypophysis cells of wild-type globular [CLS]  embryos (Friml et al. 2003), and hypophysis specification is perturbed in dcl1 embryos, we examined the activity of DR5rev\u2237GFP in dcl1-5 embryos to test whether DCL1 was required for"]]
["seedev_train_908", [" missing, in particular the genes that repress maturation during early embryogenesis.\nThe data presented here strongly suggest that miRNAs are these key negative regulators of the maturation program. In  [CLS] dcl1-15 embryos, we observed early chloroplast maturation and early accumulation of starch grains, lipid bodies, and storage proteins [CLS] .\nOur conclusion is reinforced by the transcriptional profile of dcl1-15 torpedo stage embryos, which resembles that of older embryos. Similarly, Nodine and Bartel (2010) described the early accumulation of", " missing, in particular the genes that repress maturation during early embryogenesis.\nThe data presented here strongly suggest that miRNAs are these key negative regulators of the maturation program. In  [CLS] dcl1-15 embryos, we observed early chloroplast maturation and early accumulation of starch grains, lipid bodies [CLS] , and storage proteins.\nOur conclusion is reinforced by the transcriptional profile of dcl1-15 torpedo stage embryos, which resembles that of older embryos. Similarly, Nodine and Bartel (2010) described the", " missing, in particular the genes that repress maturation during early embryogenesis.\nThe data presented here strongly suggest that miRNAs are these key negative regulators of the maturation program. In  [CLS] dcl1-15 embryos, we observed early chloroplast maturation [CLS]  and early accumulation of starch grains, lipid bodies, and storage proteins.\nOur conclusion is reinforced by the transcriptional profile of dcl1-15 torpedo stage embryos, which resembles that of older", " missing, in particular the genes that repress maturation during early embryogenesis.\nThe data presented here strongly suggest that miRNAs are these key negative regulators of the maturation program. In  [CLS] dcl1-15 embryos, we observed early chloroplast maturation and early accumulation of starch grains [CLS] , lipid bodies, and storage proteins.\nOur conclusion is reinforced by the transcriptional profile of dcl1-15 torpedo stage embryos, which resembles that of older embryos. Similarly, Nodine and Bartel (2010)"]]
["seedev_train_909", [" Zhang and Ogas, 2009). However, other pieces of the puzzle are missing, in particular the genes that repress maturation during early embryogenesis.\nThe data presented here strongly suggest that  [CLS] miRNAs are these key negative regulators of the maturation program [CLS] . In dcl1-15 embryos, we observed early chloroplast maturation and early accumulation of starch grains, lipid bodies, and storage proteins.\nOur conclusion is reinforced by the transcriptional profile of dcl1-15"]]
["seedev_train_910", [" and storage proteins.\nOur conclusion is reinforced by the transcriptional profile of dcl1-15 torpedo stage embryos, which resembles that of older embryos. Similarly, Nodine and Bartel (2010) described the  [CLS] early accumulation of OLEOSIN transcripts and a heterochronic change in the transcriptional profile in dcl1-5 [CLS]  embryos. Interestingly, even though the maturation program starts too early, the timing of the different components of the\nprogram seems to be unaffected. In particular, we still see accumulation", " by the transcriptional profile of dcl1-15 torpedo stage embryos, which resembles that of older embryos. Similarly, Nodine and Bartel (2010) described the early accumulation of OLEOSIN transcripts and a  [CLS] heterochronic change in the transcriptional profile in dcl1-5 [CLS]  embryos. Interestingly, even though the maturation program starts too early, the timing of the different components of the\nprogram seems to be unaffected. In particular, we still see accumulation", " stage embryos, which resembles that of older embryos. Similarly, Nodine and Bartel (2010) described the early accumulation of OLEOSIN transcripts and a heterochronic change in the transcriptional profile in  [CLS] dcl1-5 embryos. Interestingly, even though the maturation program [CLS]  starts too early, the timing of the different components of the\nprogram seems to be unaffected. In particular, we still see accumulation of chlorophyll preceding the expression of the"]]
["seedev_train_911", [" be unaffected. In particular, we still see accumulation of chlorophyll preceding the expression of the seed\nstorage protein At2S3, as in wild-type embryos. It is tempting to speculate that  [CLS] miRNAs regulate the initiation, but not the progression, of maturation [CLS] .\n", " be unaffected. In particular, we still see accumulation of chlorophyll preceding the expression of the seed\nstorage protein At2S3, as in wild-type embryos. It is tempting to speculate that  [CLS] miRNAs regulate the initiation, but not the progression, of maturation [CLS] .\n"]]
["seedev_train_912", [" starts too early, the timing of the different components of the\nprogram seems to be unaffected. In particular, we still see accumulation of chlorophyll preceding the expression of the  [CLS] seed\nstorage protein At2S3 [CLS] , as in wild-type embryos. It is tempting to speculate that miRNAs regulate the initiation, but not the progression, of maturation.\n"]]
["seedev_train_913", [" [CLS] maturation program was a key innovation of seed plants [CLS]  (Vicente-Carbajosa and Carbonero, 2005). Like any other important developmental process, this program is tightly regulated. Several of the mechanisms involved in\ninducing maturation during embryogenesis and repressing it after"]]
["seedev_train_914", [" storage lipids\n(Lara et al., 2003; Kagaya et al., 2005; Braybrook et al., 2006; Santos-Mendoza et al., 2008). We found that several of these genes were up-regulated in the  [CLS] dcl1-15 mutant: FUS3, LEC2, L1L, and several MYBs and bZIPs (Table I). In contrast, ABI3 was unaffected and LEC1 [CLS]  was down-regulated.\nWe observed that in the wild type, the FUS3 and LEC2 transcriptional reporter genes are excluded from the embryo proper until the early heart stage, just before", " storage lipids\n(Lara et al., 2003; Kagaya et al., 2005; Braybrook et al., 2006; Santos-Mendoza et al., 2008). We found that several of these genes were up-regulated in the  [CLS] dcl1-15 mutant: FUS3 [CLS] , LEC2, L1L, and several MYBs and bZIPs (Table I). In contrast, ABI3 was unaffected and LEC1 was down-regulated.\nWe observed that in the wild type, the FUS3 and LEC2", " storage lipids\n(Lara et al., 2003; Kagaya et al., 2005; Braybrook et al., 2006; Santos-Mendoza et al., 2008). We found that several of these genes were up-regulated in the  [CLS] dcl1-15 mutant: FUS3, LEC2, L1L, and several MYBs and bZIPs (Table I). In contrast, ABI3 [CLS]  was unaffected and LEC1 was down-regulated.\nWe observed that in the wild type, the FUS3 and LEC2 transcriptional reporter genes are excluded from the embryo proper until the early", " storage lipids\n(Lara et al., 2003; Kagaya et al., 2005; Braybrook et al., 2006; Santos-Mendoza et al., 2008). We found that several of these genes were up-regulated in the  [CLS] dcl1-15 mutant: FUS3, LEC2, L1L [CLS] , and several MYBs and bZIPs (Table I). In contrast, ABI3 was unaffected and LEC1 was down-regulated.\nWe observed that in the wild type, the FUS3 and LEC2 transcriptional reporter", " storage lipids\n(Lara et al., 2003; Kagaya et al., 2005; Braybrook et al., 2006; Santos-Mendoza et al., 2008). We found that several of these genes were up-regulated in the  [CLS] dcl1-15 mutant: FUS3, LEC2 [CLS] , L1L, and several MYBs and bZIPs (Table I). In contrast, ABI3 was unaffected and LEC1 was down-regulated.\nWe observed that in the wild type, the FUS3 and LEC2 transcriptional", " dcl1-15 mutant: FUS3, LEC2, L1L, and several MYBs and bZIPs (Table I). In contrast, ABI3 was unaffected and LEC1 was down-regulated.\nWe observed that in the wild type, the  [CLS] FUS3 and LEC2 transcriptional reporter genes are excluded from the embryo proper until the early heart stage, just before the beginning\nof maturation. In dcl1-15 [CLS] , they are expressed in the embryo proper at least by the early globular stage, coinciding with the onset of chlorophyll accumulation\nin the mutant. Our analysis of lec2-1 dcl1-15", " FUS3, LEC2, L1L, and several MYBs and bZIPs (Table I). In contrast, ABI3 was unaffected and LEC1 was down-regulated.\nWe observed that in the wild type, the FUS3 and  [CLS] LEC2 transcriptional reporter genes are excluded from the embryo proper until the early heart stage, just before the beginning\nof maturation. In dcl1-15 [CLS] , they are expressed in the embryo proper at least by the early globular stage, coinciding with the onset of chlorophyll accumulation\nin the mutant. Our analysis of lec2-1 dcl1-15", " the Maturation Program during Embryogenesis\nOne lingering mystery has been the identity of the genes directly repressing the maturation program early in development.\nOur microarray analysis indicated that ASIL1,  [CLS] HDA6/SIL1, and CLF were down-regulated in dcl1-15 [CLS] . These genes have previously been shown to repress the transcription of the LEC genes and other maturation-related genes in seedlings. Interestingly, several other histone deacetylases were down-regulated\n(HDA5, -9,", " Program during Embryogenesis\nOne lingering mystery has been the identity of the genes directly repressing the maturation program early in development.\nOur microarray analysis indicated that ASIL1, HDA6/SIL1, and  [CLS] CLF were down-regulated in dcl1-15 [CLS] . These genes have previously been shown to repress the transcription of the LEC genes and other maturation-related genes in seedlings. Interestingly, several other histone deacetylases were down-regulated\n(HDA5, -9,", " of the Maturation Program during Embryogenesis\nOne lingering mystery has been the identity of the genes directly repressing the maturation program early in development.\nOur microarray analysis indicated that  [CLS] ASIL1, HDA6/SIL1, and CLF were down-regulated in dcl1-15 [CLS] . These genes have previously been shown to repress the transcription of the LEC genes and other maturation-related genes in seedlings. Interestingly, several other histone deacetylases were down-regulated\n(HDA5, -9,"]]
["seedev_train_915", [" dcl1-15 mutant: FUS3, LEC2, L1L, and several MYBs and bZIPs (Table I). In contrast, ABI3 was unaffected and LEC1 was down-regulated.\nWe observed that in the wild type, the  [CLS] FUS3 and LEC2 transcriptional reporter genes are excluded from the embryo proper until the early heart stage, just before the beginning\nof maturation. In dcl1-15, they are expressed in the embryo proper [CLS]  at least by the early globular stage, coinciding with the onset of chlorophyll accumulation\nin the mutant. Our analysis of lec2-1 dcl1-15 and fus3-3 dcl1-15 double mutants confirms that", " FUS3, LEC2, L1L, and several MYBs and bZIPs (Table I). In contrast, ABI3 was unaffected and LEC1 was down-regulated.\nWe observed that in the wild type, the FUS3 and  [CLS] LEC2 transcriptional reporter genes are excluded from the embryo proper [CLS]  until the early heart stage, just before the beginning\nof maturation. In dcl1-15, they are expressed in the embryo proper at least by the early globular stage, coinciding with", " dcl1-15 mutant: FUS3, LEC2, L1L, and several MYBs and bZIPs (Table I). In contrast, ABI3 was unaffected and LEC1 was down-regulated.\nWe observed that in the wild type, the  [CLS] FUS3 and LEC2 transcriptional reporter genes are excluded from the embryo proper [CLS]  until the early heart stage, just before the beginning\nof maturation. In dcl1-15, they are expressed in the embryo proper at least by the early globular stage, coinciding with", " FUS3, LEC2, L1L, and several MYBs and bZIPs (Table I). In contrast, ABI3 was unaffected and LEC1 was down-regulated.\nWe observed that in the wild type, the FUS3 and  [CLS] LEC2 transcriptional reporter genes are excluded from the embryo proper until the early heart stage, just before the beginning\nof maturation. In dcl1-15, they are expressed in the embryo proper [CLS]  at least by the early globular stage, coinciding with the onset of chlorophyll accumulation\nin the mutant. Our analysis of lec2-1 dcl1-15 and fus3-3 dcl1-15 double mutants confirms that"]]
["seedev_train_916", [" [CLS] maturation program are the LEC genes, probably assisted by several bZIP and MYB transcription\nfactors [CLS]  (Baud et al., 2008). All of these bind to the promoters of seed storage protein genes and genes involved in the synthesis of storage lipids\n(Lara et al., 2003;"]]
["seedev_train_917", [" [CLS] maturation program are the LEC genes, probably assisted by several bZIP and MYB transcription\nfactors [CLS]  (Baud et al., 2008). All of these bind to the promoters of seed storage protein genes and genes involved in the synthesis of storage lipids\n(Lara et al., 2003;"]]
["seedev_train_918", [" [CLS] maturation program are the LEC genes [CLS] , probably assisted by several bZIP and MYB transcription\nfactors (Baud et al., 2008). All of these bind to the promoters of seed storage protein genes and genes involved in"]]
["seedev_train_919", [" [CLS] LEC genes, probably assisted by several bZIP and MYB transcription\nfactors (Baud et al., 2008). All of these bind to the promoters of seed storage protein genes and genes involved in the synthesis of storage lipids [CLS] \n(Lara et al., 2003; Kagaya et al., 2005; Braybrook et al., 2006; Santos-Mendoza et al., 2008). We found that several of these genes were up-regulated in the dcl1-15 mutant:", " [CLS] LEC genes, probably assisted by several bZIP and MYB transcription\nfactors (Baud et al., 2008). All of these bind to the promoters of seed storage protein genes [CLS]  and genes involved in the synthesis of storage lipids\n(Lara et al., 2003; Kagaya et al., 2005; Braybrook et al., 2006; Santos-Mendoza et al., 2008). We found that several"]]
["seedev_train_920", [" [CLS] bZIP and MYB transcription\nfactors (Baud et al., 2008). All of these bind to the promoters of seed storage protein genes and genes involved in the synthesis of storage lipids [CLS] \n(Lara et al., 2003; Kagaya et al., 2005; Braybrook et al., 2006; Santos-Mendoza et al., 2008). We found that several of these genes were up-regulated in the dcl1-15 mutant:", " [CLS] bZIP and MYB transcription\nfactors (Baud et al., 2008). All of these bind to the promoters of seed storage protein genes [CLS]  and genes involved in the synthesis of storage lipids\n(Lara et al., 2003; Kagaya et al., 2005; Braybrook et al., 2006; Santos-Mendoza et al., 2008). We found that several"]]
["seedev_train_921", [" [CLS] MYB transcription\nfactors (Baud et al., 2008). All of these bind to the promoters of seed storage protein genes and genes involved in the synthesis of storage lipids [CLS] \n(Lara et al., 2003; Kagaya et al., 2005; Braybrook et al., 2006; Santos-Mendoza et al., 2008). We found that several of these genes were up-regulated in the dcl1-15 mutant:", " [CLS] MYB transcription\nfactors (Baud et al., 2008). All of these bind to the promoters of seed storage protein genes [CLS]  and genes involved in the synthesis of storage lipids\n(Lara et al., 2003; Kagaya et al., 2005; Braybrook et al., 2006; Santos-Mendoza et al., 2008). We found that several"]]
["seedev_train_922", [" dcl1-15 mutant: FUS3, LEC2, L1L, and several MYBs and bZIPs (Table I). In contrast, ABI3 was unaffected and LEC1 was down-regulated.\nWe observed that in the wild type, the  [CLS] FUS3 and LEC2 transcriptional reporter genes are excluded from the embryo proper until the early heart stage, just before the beginning\nof maturation [CLS] . In dcl1-15, they are expressed in the embryo proper at least by the early globular stage, coinciding with the onset of chlorophyll accumulation\nin the mutant. Our analysis of", " FUS3, LEC2, L1L, and several MYBs and bZIPs (Table I). In contrast, ABI3 was unaffected and LEC1 was down-regulated.\nWe observed that in the wild type, the FUS3 and  [CLS] LEC2 transcriptional reporter genes are excluded from the embryo proper until the early heart stage, just before the beginning\nof maturation [CLS] . In dcl1-15, they are expressed in the embryo proper at least by the early globular stage, coinciding with the onset of chlorophyll accumulation\nin the mutant. Our analysis of"]]
["seedev_train_923", [" dcl1-15 mutant: FUS3, LEC2, L1L, and several MYBs and bZIPs (Table I). In contrast, ABI3 was unaffected and LEC1 was down-regulated.\nWe observed that in the wild type, the  [CLS] FUS3 and LEC2 transcriptional reporter genes are excluded from the embryo proper until the early heart stage, just before the beginning\nof maturation. In dcl1-15, they are expressed in the embryo proper at least by the early globular stage [CLS] , coinciding with the onset of chlorophyll accumulation\nin the mutant. Our analysis of lec2-1 dcl1-15 and fus3-3 dcl1-15 double mutants confirms that both proteins are required for the early", " FUS3, LEC2, L1L, and several MYBs and bZIPs (Table I). In contrast, ABI3 was unaffected and LEC1 was down-regulated.\nWe observed that in the wild type, the FUS3 and  [CLS] LEC2 transcriptional reporter genes are excluded from the embryo proper until the early heart stage, just before the beginning\nof maturation. In dcl1-15, they are expressed in the embryo proper at least by the early globular stage [CLS] , coinciding with the onset of chlorophyll accumulation\nin the mutant. Our analysis of lec2-1 dcl1-15 and fus3-3 dcl1-15 double mutants confirms that both proteins are required for the early"]]
["seedev_train_924", [" up-regulated in the dcl1-15 mutant: FUS3, LEC2, L1L, and several MYBs and bZIPs (Table I). In contrast, ABI3 was unaffected and LEC1 was down-regulated.\nWe observed that in the  [CLS] wild type, the FUS3 and LEC2 [CLS]  transcriptional reporter genes are excluded from the embryo proper until the early heart stage, just before the beginning\nof maturation. In dcl1-15, they are expressed in the embryo proper", " up-regulated in the dcl1-15 mutant: FUS3, LEC2, L1L, and several MYBs and bZIPs (Table I). In contrast, ABI3 was unaffected and LEC1 was down-regulated.\nWe observed that in the  [CLS] wild type, the FUS3 [CLS]  and LEC2 transcriptional reporter genes are excluded from the embryo proper until the early heart stage, just before the beginning\nof maturation. In dcl1-15, they are expressed in the"]]
["seedev_train_925", [" FUS3, LEC2, L1L, and several MYBs and bZIPs (Table I). In contrast, ABI3 was unaffected and LEC1 was down-regulated.\nWe observed that in the wild type, the FUS3 and  [CLS] LEC2 transcriptional reporter genes are excluded from the embryo proper until the early heart stage [CLS] , just before the beginning\nof maturation. In dcl1-15, they are expressed in the embryo proper at least by the early globular stage, coinciding with the onset of chlorophyll accumulation", " dcl1-15 mutant: FUS3, LEC2, L1L, and several MYBs and bZIPs (Table I). In contrast, ABI3 was unaffected and LEC1 was down-regulated.\nWe observed that in the wild type, the  [CLS] FUS3 and LEC2 transcriptional reporter genes are excluded from the embryo proper until the early heart stage [CLS] , just before the beginning\nof maturation. In dcl1-15, they are expressed in the embryo proper at least by the early globular stage, coinciding with the onset of chlorophyll accumulation"]]
["seedev_train_926", [" LEC genes and of\nthe genes encoding storage products, regulating the program at least at two levels (Gao et al., 2009). We analyzed single and double mutant combinations of  [CLS] asil1-1, asil2-1, and sil1-1 and found that these genes redundantly repress the maturation program [CLS]  during early embryogenesis, downstream of miRNA targets.\nThus, our studies demonstrate, to our knowledge for the first time, that the same genetic mechanism negatively regulates seed\nstorage genes during"]]
["seedev_train_927", [" of\nthe genes encoding storage products, regulating the program at least at two levels (Gao et al., 2009). We analyzed single and double mutant combinations of asil1-1, asil2-1, and  [CLS] sil1-1 and found that these genes redundantly repress the maturation program [CLS]  during early embryogenesis, downstream of miRNA targets.\nThus, our studies demonstrate, to our knowledge for the first time, that the same genetic mechanism negatively regulates seed\nstorage genes during"]]
["seedev_train_928", [" genes and of\nthe genes encoding storage products, regulating the program at least at two levels (Gao et al., 2009). We analyzed single and double mutant combinations of asil1-1,  [CLS] asil2-1, and sil1-1 and found that these genes redundantly repress the maturation program [CLS]  during early embryogenesis, downstream of miRNA targets.\nThus, our studies demonstrate, to our knowledge for the first time, that the same genetic mechanism negatively regulates seed\nstorage genes during"]]
["seedev_train_929", [" of the LEC genes and other maturation-related genes in seedlings. Interestingly, several other histone deacetylases were down-regulated\n(HDA5, -9, -10, and HDT1) as well as the closest homolog to  [CLS] ASIL1 (ASIL2 [CLS] ). It has already been shown that ASIL1 binds to a GT-box, which is present in both the promoters of the LEC genes and of\nthe genes encoding storage products,"]]
["seedev_train_930", [" the Maturation Program during Embryogenesis\nOne lingering mystery has been the identity of the genes directly repressing the maturation program early in development.\nOur microarray analysis indicated that ASIL1,  [CLS] HDA6/SIL1 [CLS] , and CLF were down-regulated in dcl1-15. These genes have previously been shown to repress the transcription of the LEC genes and other maturation-related genes in seedlings. Interestingly, several other"]]
["seedev_train_931", [" in seedlings. Interestingly, several other histone deacetylases were down-regulated\n(HDA5, -9, -10, and HDT1) as well as the closest homolog to ASIL1 (ASIL2). It has already been shown that  [CLS] ASIL1 binds to a GT-box [CLS] , which is present in both the promoters of the LEC genes and of\nthe genes encoding storage products, regulating the program at least at two levels (Gao et al.,"]]
["seedev_train_932", [" other histone deacetylases were down-regulated\n(HDA5, -9, -10, and HDT1) as well as the closest homolog to ASIL1 (ASIL2). It has already been shown that ASIL1 binds to a  [CLS] GT-box, which is present in both the promoters of the LEC genes and of\nthe genes encoding storage products [CLS] , regulating the program at least at two levels (Gao et al., 2009). We analyzed single and double mutant combinations of asil1-1, asil2-1, and sil1-1 and found that these genes", " other histone deacetylases were down-regulated\n(HDA5, -9, -10, and HDT1) as well as the closest homolog to ASIL1 (ASIL2). It has already been shown that ASIL1 binds to a  [CLS] GT-box, which is present in both the promoters of the LEC genes [CLS]  and of\nthe genes encoding storage products, regulating the program at least at two levels (Gao et al., 2009). We analyzed single and double mutant combinations of asil1-1, asil2-1,"]]
["seedev_train_933", [" and CLF were down-regulated in dcl1-15. These genes have previously been shown to repress the transcription of the LEC genes and other maturation-related genes in seedlings. Interestingly, several other  [CLS] histone deacetylases were down-regulated\n(HDA5, -9, -10 [CLS] , and HDT1) as well as the closest homolog to ASIL1 (ASIL2). It has already been shown that ASIL1 binds to a GT-box, which is present in both the promoters"]]
["seedev_train_934", [" and CLF were down-regulated in dcl1-15. These genes have previously been shown to repress the transcription of the LEC genes and other maturation-related genes in seedlings. Interestingly, several other  [CLS] histone deacetylases were down-regulated\n(HDA5 [CLS] , -9, -10, and HDT1) as well as the closest homolog to ASIL1 (ASIL2). It has already been shown that ASIL1 binds to a GT-box, which is present in both"]]
["seedev_train_935", [" and CLF were down-regulated in dcl1-15. These genes have previously been shown to repress the transcription of the LEC genes and other maturation-related genes in seedlings. Interestingly, several other  [CLS] histone deacetylases were down-regulated\n(HDA5, -9 [CLS] , -10, and HDT1) as well as the closest homolog to ASIL1 (ASIL2). It has already been shown that ASIL1 binds to a GT-box, which is present in both the"]]
["seedev_train_936", [" and CLF were down-regulated in dcl1-15. These genes have previously been shown to repress the transcription of the LEC genes and other maturation-related genes in seedlings. Interestingly, several other  [CLS] histone deacetylases were down-regulated\n(HDA5, -9, -10, and HDT1 [CLS] ) as well as the closest homolog to ASIL1 (ASIL2). It has already been shown that ASIL1 binds to a GT-box, which is present in both the promoters of the"]]
["seedev_train_937", [" at least at two levels (Gao et al., 2009). We analyzed single and double mutant combinations of asil1-1, asil2-1, and sil1-1 and found that these genes redundantly repress the  [CLS] maturation program during early embryogenesis [CLS] , downstream of miRNA targets.\nThus, our studies demonstrate, to our knowledge for the first time, that the same genetic mechanism negatively regulates seed\nstorage genes during early embryogenesis and"]]
["seedev_train_938", [" (or cluster), while genes encoding\noleosins and seed storage proteins were identified in another subnetwork with a distinct\nexpression profile. In the triacylglycerol assembly pathway, only the genes encoding\n [CLS] diacylglycerol acyltransferase 1 (DGAT1 [CLS] ) and a putative cytosolic \"type 3\" DGAT exhibited\na similar expression pattern with genes encoding oleosins. We also detected a large\nnumber of putative cis-acting regulatory elements in the"]]
["seedev_train_939", [" genes encoding oleosins. We also detected a large\nnumber of putative cis-acting regulatory elements in the promoter regions of these genes, and promoter motifs\nfor LEC1 (LEAFY COTYLEDON 1),  [CLS] DOF (DNA-binding-with-One-Finger [CLS] ), GATA, and MYB transcription\nfactors (TF), as well as SORLIP5 (Sequences Over-Represented in Light-Induced Promoters\n5), are overrepresented in the promoter regions of fatty acid biosynthetic genes.\nThe conserved"]]
["seedev_train_940", [" cis-acting regulatory elements in the promoter regions of these genes, and promoter motifs\nfor LEC1 (LEAFY COTYLEDON 1), DOF (DNA-binding-with-One-Finger), GATA, and MYB transcription\nfactors (TF), as well as  [CLS] SORLIP5 (Sequences Over-Represented in Light-Induced Promoters\n5 [CLS] ), are overrepresented in the promoter regions of fatty acid biosynthetic genes.\nThe conserved CCAAT motifs for B3-domain TFs and binding sites for bZIP (basic-leucine\nzipper) TFs are enriched in"]]
["seedev_train_941", [" similar expression pattern with genes encoding oleosins. We also detected a large\nnumber of putative cis-acting regulatory elements in the promoter regions of these genes, and promoter motifs\nfor  [CLS] LEC1 (LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 [CLS] ), DOF (DNA-binding-with-One-Finger), GATA, and MYB transcription\nfactors (TF), as well as SORLIP5 (Sequences Over-Represented in Light-Induced Promoters\n5), are overrepresented in the promoter regions of fatty acid biosynthetic genes."]]
["seedev_train_942", [" SORLIP5 (Sequences Over-Represented in Light-Induced Promoters\n5), are overrepresented in the promoter regions of fatty acid biosynthetic genes.\nThe conserved CCAAT motifs for B3-domain TFs and binding sites for  [CLS] bZIP (basic-leucine\nzipper [CLS] ) TFs are enriched in the promoters of genes encoding oleosins and seed storage\nproteins.\n"]]
["seedev_train_943", [" cis-acting regulatory elements in the promoter regions of these genes, and promoter motifs\nfor LEC1 (LEAFY COTYLEDON 1), DOF (DNA-binding-with-One-Finger), GATA, and MYB transcription\nfactors (TF), as well as  [CLS] SORLIP5 (Sequences Over-Represented in Light-Induced Promoters\n5), are overrepresented in the promoter regions of fatty acid biosynthetic genes [CLS] .\nThe conserved CCAAT motifs for B3-domain TFs and binding sites for bZIP (basic-leucine\nzipper) TFs are enriched in the promoters of genes encoding oleosins and seed storage\nproteins.\n"]]
["seedev_train_944", ["\npathway were found in one coexpression subnetwork (or cluster), while genes encoding\noleosins and seed storage proteins were identified in another subnetwork with a distinct\nexpression profile. In the  [CLS] triacylglycerol assembly pathway, only the genes encoding\ndiacylglycerol acyltransferase 1 (DGAT1) and a putative cytosolic \"type 3\" DGAT [CLS]  exhibited\na similar expression pattern with genes encoding oleosins. We also detected a large\nnumber of putative cis-acting regulatory elements in the promoter regions of these genes, and promoter"]]
["seedev_train_945", [" GATA, and MYB transcription\nfactors (TF), as well as SORLIP5 (Sequences Over-Represented in Light-Induced Promoters\n5), are overrepresented in the promoter regions of fatty acid biosynthetic genes.\nThe conserved  [CLS] CCAAT motifs for B3-domain TFs and binding sites for bZIP (basic-leucine\nzipper) TFs are enriched in the promoters of genes encoding oleosins [CLS]  and seed storage\nproteins.\n", " GATA, and MYB transcription\nfactors (TF), as well as SORLIP5 (Sequences Over-Represented in Light-Induced Promoters\n5), are overrepresented in the promoter regions of fatty acid biosynthetic genes.\nThe conserved  [CLS] CCAAT motifs for B3-domain TFs and binding sites for bZIP (basic-leucine\nzipper) TFs are enriched in the promoters of genes encoding oleosins and seed storage\nproteins [CLS] .\n"]]
["seedev_train_946", ["\npathway were found in one coexpression subnetwork (or cluster), while genes encoding\noleosins and seed storage proteins were identified in another subnetwork with a distinct\nexpression profile. In the  [CLS] triacylglycerol assembly pathway, only the genes encoding\ndiacylglycerol acyltransferase 1 (DGAT1 [CLS] ) and a putative cytosolic \"type 3\" DGAT exhibited\na similar expression pattern with genes encoding oleosins. We also detected a large\nnumber of putative cis-acting regulatory elements in the"]]
["seedev_train_947", [" GATA, and MYB transcription\nfactors (TF), as well as SORLIP5 (Sequences Over-Represented in Light-Induced Promoters\n5), are overrepresented in the promoter regions of fatty acid biosynthetic genes.\nThe conserved  [CLS] CCAAT motifs for B3-domain TFs [CLS]  and binding sites for bZIP (basic-leucine\nzipper) TFs are enriched in the promoters of genes encoding oleosins and seed storage\nproteins.\n"]]
["seedev_train_948", [" [CLS] WRI1: WRINKLED 1 [CLS] ; ABI3: ABSCISIC ACID-INSENSITIVE 3; EEL: ENHANCED EM (EMBRYO MORPHOGENESIS) LEVEL; FUS3: FUSCA 3; ABI5: ABSCISIC ACID-INSENSITIVE 5; PKL: PICKLE; ASIL1: ARABIDOPSIS 6B-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1-LIKE 1.\nTo computationally identify cis-acting"]]
["seedev_train_949", [" [CLS] ABI3: ABSCISIC ACID-INSENSITIVE 3 [CLS] ; EEL: ENHANCED EM (EMBRYO MORPHOGENESIS) LEVEL; FUS3: FUSCA 3; ABI5: ABSCISIC ACID-INSENSITIVE 5; PKL: PICKLE; ASIL1: ARABIDOPSIS 6B-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1-LIKE 1.\nTo computationally identify cis-acting regulatory elements, the upstream"]]
["seedev_train_950", [" 5; GL2: GLABRA 2; LEC1: LEAFY COTELYDON 1; L1L: LEAFY COTELYDON 1 LIKE; WRI1: WRINKLED 1; ABI3: ABSCISIC ACID-INSENSITIVE 3; EEL: ENHANCED EM (EMBRYO MORPHOGENESIS) LEVEL; FUS3: FUSCA 3;  [CLS] ABI5: ABSCISIC ACID-INSENSITIVE 5 [CLS] ; PKL: PICKLE; ASIL1: ARABIDOPSIS 6B-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1-LIKE 1.\nTo computationally identify cis-acting regulatory elements, the upstream promoter sequences for the genes involved\nin storage reserve biosynthesis were extracted from"]]
["seedev_train_951", [" [CLS] ENHANCED EM (EMBRYO MORPHOGENESIS) LEVEL [CLS] ; FUS3: FUSCA 3; ABI5: ABSCISIC ACID-INSENSITIVE 5; PKL: PICKLE; ASIL1: ARABIDOPSIS 6B-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1-LIKE 1.\nTo computationally identify cis-acting regulatory elements, the upstream promoter sequences for the genes involved"]]
["seedev_train_952", [" COTELYDON 1; L1L: LEAFY COTELYDON 1 LIKE; WRI1: WRINKLED 1; ABI3: ABSCISIC ACID-INSENSITIVE 3; EEL: ENHANCED EM (EMBRYO MORPHOGENESIS) LEVEL; FUS3: FUSCA 3; ABI5: ABSCISIC ACID-INSENSITIVE 5; PKL: PICKLE;  [CLS] ASIL1: ARABIDOPSIS 6B-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1-LIKE 1 [CLS] .\nTo computationally identify cis-acting regulatory elements, the upstream promoter sequences for the genes involved\nin storage reserve biosynthesis were extracted from the RSAT server [73].\n"]]
["seedev_train_953", [" LEC1: LEAFY COTELYDON 1; L1L: LEAFY COTELYDON 1 LIKE; WRI1: WRINKLED 1; ABI3: ABSCISIC ACID-INSENSITIVE 3; EEL: ENHANCED EM (EMBRYO MORPHOGENESIS) LEVEL; FUS3: FUSCA 3; ABI5: ABSCISIC ACID-INSENSITIVE 5;  [CLS] PKL: PICKLE [CLS] ; ASIL1: ARABIDOPSIS 6B-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1-LIKE 1.\nTo computationally identify cis-acting regulatory elements, the upstream promoter sequences for the genes involved\nin storage reserve biosynthesis were extracted from the RSAT"]]
["seedev_train_954", [" [CLS] AGL5: AGAMOUS-LIKE 5 [CLS] ; GL2: GLABRA 2; LEC1: LEAFY COTELYDON 1; L1L: LEAFY COTELYDON 1 LIKE; WRI1: WRINKLED 1; ABI3: ABSCISIC ACID-INSENSITIVE 3; EEL: ENHANCED EM (EMBRYO MORPHOGENESIS) LEVEL; FUS3: FUSCA 3; ABI5:"]]
["seedev_train_955", [" follows: AGL5: AGAMOUS-LIKE 5; GL2: GLABRA 2; LEC1: LEAFY COTELYDON 1; L1L: LEAFY COTELYDON 1 LIKE; WRI1: WRINKLED 1; ABI3: ABSCISIC ACID-INSENSITIVE 3; EEL: ENHANCED EM (EMBRYO MORPHOGENESIS) LEVEL;  [CLS] FUS3: FUSCA 3 [CLS] ; ABI5: ABSCISIC ACID-INSENSITIVE 5; PKL: PICKLE; ASIL1: ARABIDOPSIS 6B-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1-LIKE 1.\nTo computationally identify cis-acting regulatory elements, the upstream promoter sequences for the genes involved\nin storage reserve"]]
["seedev_train_956", [" [CLS] L1L: LEAFY COTELYDON 1 LIKE [CLS] ; WRI1: WRINKLED 1; ABI3: ABSCISIC ACID-INSENSITIVE 3; EEL: ENHANCED EM (EMBRYO MORPHOGENESIS) LEVEL; FUS3: FUSCA 3; ABI5: ABSCISIC ACID-INSENSITIVE 5; PKL: PICKLE; ASIL1: ARABIDOPSIS 6B-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1-LIKE 1.\nTo"]]
["seedev_train_957", [" [CLS] LEC1: LEAFY COTELYDON 1 [CLS] ; L1L: LEAFY COTELYDON 1 LIKE; WRI1: WRINKLED 1; ABI3: ABSCISIC ACID-INSENSITIVE 3; EEL: ENHANCED EM (EMBRYO MORPHOGENESIS) LEVEL; FUS3: FUSCA 3; ABI5: ABSCISIC ACID-INSENSITIVE 5; PKL: PICKLE; ASIL1: ARABIDOPSIS"]]
["seedev_train_958", [" [CLS] EEL: ENHANCED EM (EMBRYO MORPHOGENESIS) LEVEL [CLS] ; FUS3: FUSCA 3; ABI5: ABSCISIC ACID-INSENSITIVE 5; PKL: PICKLE; ASIL1: ARABIDOPSIS 6B-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1-LIKE 1.\nTo computationally identify cis-acting regulatory elements, the upstream promoter sequences for the genes involved"]]
["seedev_train_959", [" [CLS] GL2: GLABRA 2 [CLS] ; LEC1: LEAFY COTELYDON 1; L1L: LEAFY COTELYDON 1 LIKE; WRI1: WRINKLED 1; ABI3: ABSCISIC ACID-INSENSITIVE 3; EEL: ENHANCED EM (EMBRYO MORPHOGENESIS) LEVEL; FUS3: FUSCA 3; ABI5: ABSCISIC ACID-INSENSITIVE 5;"]]
["seedev_train_960", [" and showed that it functions at an early developmental stage to maintain embryonic cell fate. The LEC1 gene encodes a transcription factor homolog, the CCAAT box\u2013binding factor HAP3 subunit.  [CLS] LEC1\nRNA accumulates only during seed development in embryo cell types [CLS]  and\nin endosperm tissue. Ectopic postembryonic expression of the LEC1\ngene in vegetative cells induces the expression of embryo-specific\ngenes and initiates formation of embryo-like structures. Our results\nsuggest", " and showed that it functions at an early developmental stage to maintain embryonic cell fate. The LEC1 gene encodes a transcription factor homolog, the CCAAT box\u2013binding factor HAP3 subunit.  [CLS] LEC1\nRNA accumulates only during seed development in embryo cell types and\nin endosperm tissue [CLS] . Ectopic postembryonic expression of the LEC1\ngene in vegetative cells induces the expression of embryo-specific\ngenes and initiates formation of embryo-like structures. Our results\nsuggest that LEC1 is an"]]
["seedev_train_961", [" The LEC1 gene encodes a transcription factor homolog, the CCAAT box\u2013binding factor HAP3 subunit. LEC1\nRNA accumulates only during seed development in embryo cell types and\nin endosperm tissue.  [CLS] Ectopic postembryonic expression of the LEC1\ngene in vegetative cells induces the expression of embryo-specific\ngenes and initiates formation of embryo-like structures [CLS] . Our results\nsuggest that LEC1 is an important regulator of embryo development that\nactivates the transcription of genes required for both embryo\nmorphogenesis and cellular differentiation.prs.rt(\"abs_end\");\n", " The LEC1 gene encodes a transcription factor homolog, the CCAAT box\u2013binding factor HAP3 subunit. LEC1\nRNA accumulates only during seed development in embryo cell types and\nin endosperm tissue.  [CLS] Ectopic postembryonic expression of the LEC1\ngene in vegetative cells induces the expression of embryo-specific\ngenes [CLS]  and initiates formation of embryo-like structures. Our results\nsuggest that LEC1 is an important regulator of embryo development that\nactivates the transcription of genes required for both embryo\nmorphogenesis"]]
["seedev_train_962", [" [CLS] LEAFY COTYLEDON1 (LEC1 [CLS] ) gene is required for the specification of cotyledon identity and the completion of embryo maturation. We isolated the LEC1 gene and showed that it functions at an early developmental"]]
["seedev_train_963", [" cotyledon identity and the completion of embryo maturation. We isolated the LEC1 gene and showed that it functions at an early developmental stage to maintain embryonic cell fate. The  [CLS] LEC1 gene encodes a transcription factor homolog, the CCAAT box\u2013binding factor HAP3 subunit [CLS] . LEC1\nRNA accumulates only during seed development in embryo cell types and\nin endosperm tissue. Ectopic postembryonic expression of the LEC1\ngene in vegetative cells induces the expression of"]]
["seedev_train_964", [" [CLS] LEC1 gene and showed that it functions at an early developmental stage [CLS]  to maintain embryonic cell fate. The LEC1 gene encodes a transcription factor homolog, the CCAAT box\u2013binding factor HAP3 subunit. LEC1\nRNA accumulates only during seed development in embryo cell"]]
["seedev_train_965", ["\nin endosperm tissue. Ectopic postembryonic expression of the LEC1\ngene in vegetative cells induces the expression of embryo-specific\ngenes and initiates formation of embryo-like structures. Our results\nsuggest that  [CLS] LEC1 is an important regulator of embryo development [CLS]  that\nactivates the transcription of genes required for both embryo\nmorphogenesis and cellular differentiation.prs.rt(\"abs_end\");\n"]]
["seedev_train_966", [" of the LEC1\ngene in vegetative cells induces the expression of embryo-specific\ngenes and initiates formation of embryo-like structures. Our results\nsuggest that LEC1 is an important regulator of  [CLS] embryo development that\nactivates the transcription of genes required for both embryo\nmorphogenesis [CLS]  and cellular differentiation.prs.rt(\"abs_end\");\n", " of the LEC1\ngene in vegetative cells induces the expression of embryo-specific\ngenes and initiates formation of embryo-like structures. Our results\nsuggest that LEC1 is an important regulator of  [CLS] embryo development that\nactivates the transcription of genes required for both embryo\nmorphogenesis and cellular differentiation [CLS] .prs.rt(\"abs_end\");\n"]]
["seedev_train_967", [" the CCAAT box\u2013binding factor HAP3 subunit. LEC1\nRNA accumulates only during seed development in embryo cell types and\nin endosperm tissue. Ectopic postembryonic expression of the LEC1\ngene in  [CLS] vegetative cells induces the expression of embryo-specific\ngenes and initiates formation of embryo-like structures [CLS] . Our results\nsuggest that LEC1 is an important regulator of embryo development that\nactivates the transcription of genes required for both embryo\nmorphogenesis and cellular differentiation.prs.rt(\"abs_end\");\n", " the CCAAT box\u2013binding factor HAP3 subunit. LEC1\nRNA accumulates only during seed development in embryo cell types and\nin endosperm tissue. Ectopic postembryonic expression of the LEC1\ngene in  [CLS] vegetative cells induces the expression of embryo-specific\ngenes [CLS]  and initiates formation of embryo-like structures. Our results\nsuggest that LEC1 is an important regulator of embryo development that\nactivates the transcription of genes required for both embryo\nmorphogenesis"]]
["seedev_train_968", [" COTYLEDON1 (LEC1) gene is required for the specification of cotyledon identity and the completion of embryo maturation. We isolated the LEC1 gene and showed that it functions at an  [CLS] early developmental stage to maintain embryonic cell fate [CLS] . The LEC1 gene encodes a transcription factor homolog, the CCAAT box\u2013binding factor HAP3 subunit. LEC1\nRNA accumulates only during seed development in embryo cell types and\nin endosperm tissue."]]
["seedev_train_969", [" presumed orthologs in bean (Bobb et\u00a0al. 1995) or rice (Hattori et\u00a0al. 1994), have two additional basic domains, B1 and B2 (Giraudat et\u00a0al. 1992 ;Hill et\u00a0al. 1996), preceding B3. In  [CLS] FUS3, B1 [CLS]  is absent but, to a small extent, there is sequence similarity to B2 (Fig.\u00a05b). Moreover, the C-terminal portion of FUS3 downstream of the B3 domain includes an acidic stretch", " structural similarities of FUS3 and ABI3 contribute to this synergism.\nSo far, FUS3 is the smallest member of the protein family characterized by VP1/ABI3-like B3 domains (Fig.\u00a06). VP1 and  [CLS] ABI3, as well as their presumed orthologs in bean (Bobb et\u00a0al. 1995) or rice (Hattori et\u00a0al. 1994), have two additional basic domains, B1 [CLS]  and B2 (Giraudat et\u00a0al. 1992 ;Hill et\u00a0al. 1996), preceding B3. In FUS3, B1 is absent but, to a small extent, there is sequence similarity to B2 (Fig.\u00a05b). Moreover, the", " what extent structural similarities of FUS3 and ABI3 contribute to this synergism.\nSo far, FUS3 is the smallest member of the protein family characterized by VP1/ABI3-like B3 domains (Fig.\u00a06).  [CLS] VP1 and ABI3, as well as their presumed orthologs in bean (Bobb et\u00a0al. 1995) or rice (Hattori et\u00a0al. 1994), have two additional basic domains, B1 [CLS]  and B2 (Giraudat et\u00a0al. 1992 ;Hill et\u00a0al. 1996), preceding B3. In FUS3, B1 is absent but, to a small extent, there is sequence similarity to B2 (Fig.\u00a05b). Moreover, the"]]
["seedev_train_970", [" what extent structural similarities of FUS3 and ABI3 contribute to this synergism.\nSo far, FUS3 is the smallest member of the protein family characterized by VP1/ABI3-like B3 domains (Fig.\u00a06).  [CLS] VP1 and ABI3, as well as their presumed orthologs in bean (Bobb et\u00a0al. 1995) or rice (Hattori et\u00a0al. 1994), have two additional basic domains, B1 and B2 [CLS]  (Giraudat et\u00a0al. 1992 ;Hill et\u00a0al. 1996), preceding B3. In FUS3, B1 is absent but, to a small extent, there is sequence similarity to B2 (Fig.\u00a05b). Moreover, the C-terminal portion", " structural similarities of FUS3 and ABI3 contribute to this synergism.\nSo far, FUS3 is the smallest member of the protein family characterized by VP1/ABI3-like B3 domains (Fig.\u00a06). VP1 and  [CLS] ABI3, as well as their presumed orthologs in bean (Bobb et\u00a0al. 1995) or rice (Hattori et\u00a0al. 1994), have two additional basic domains, B1 and B2 [CLS]  (Giraudat et\u00a0al. 1992 ;Hill et\u00a0al. 1996), preceding B3. In FUS3, B1 is absent but, to a small extent, there is sequence similarity to B2 (Fig.\u00a05b). Moreover, the C-terminal portion"]]
["seedev_train_971", [" the B3 domain of FUS3 similarly mediates binding to specific promoter sequences (B\u00e4umlein et\u00a0al. 1994). The same applies to ABI3 (Nambara et\u00a0al. 1995 ;Parcy et\u00a0al. 1994). During embryogenesis the  [CLS] FUS3 transcript becomes detectable\u00a02 d.a.p. [CLS]  paralleled by the appearance of the ABI3 mRNA. The finding of co-expression at differing levels, however, is consistent with the fact that FUS3 and ABI3, in a combinatorial and"]]
["seedev_train_972", [" of FUS3 similarly mediates binding to specific promoter sequences (B\u00e4umlein et\u00a0al. 1994). The same applies to ABI3 (Nambara et\u00a0al. 1995 ;Parcy et\u00a0al. 1994). During embryogenesis the FUS3 transcript becomes detectable\u00a0 [CLS] 2 d.a.p. paralleled by the appearance of the ABI3 mRNA [CLS] . The finding of co-expression at differing levels, however, is consistent with the fact that FUS3 and ABI3, in a combinatorial and synergistic fashion, control overlapping yet not identical aspects"]]
["seedev_train_973", [" apparently critical residues are located within a stretch of more than 100 amino acids, about one-third of the FUS3 sequence, which exhibits significant sequence similarity to a distinct domain,  [CLS] B3 or basic region 3 (Giraudat et\u00a0al. 1992), characteristic of VP1/ABI3-like proteins [CLS] . These factors are transcriptional regulators, most of them involved in the control of seed maturation (Bobb et\u00a0al. 1995 ;Hattori et\u00a0al. 1994 ;Hoecker et\u00a0al. 1995 ;McCarty et\u00a0al. 1991 ;Nakagawa et\u00a0al."]]
["seedev_train_974", [" that the B3 domain of VP1, when taken out of its native context, binds in\u00a0vitro to the DNA element TCCATGCAT (Suzuki et\u00a0al. 1997). It is likely, therefore, that the  [CLS] B3 domain of FUS3 [CLS]  similarly mediates binding to specific promoter sequences (B\u00e4umlein et\u00a0al. 1994). The same applies to ABI3 (Nambara et\u00a0al. 1995 ;Parcy et\u00a0al. 1994). During embryogenesis the FUS3 transcript becomes detectable\u00a02 d.a.p."]]
["seedev_train_975", [" what extent structural similarities of FUS3 and ABI3 contribute to this synergism.\nSo far, FUS3 is the smallest member of the protein family characterized by VP1/ABI3-like B3 domains (Fig.\u00a06).  [CLS] VP1 and ABI3, as well as their presumed orthologs in bean (Bobb et\u00a0al. 1995) or rice (Hattori et\u00a0al. 1994), have two additional basic domains, B1 and B2 (Giraudat et\u00a0al. 1992 ;Hill et\u00a0al. 1996), preceding B3 [CLS] . In FUS3, B1 is absent but, to a small extent, there is sequence similarity to B2 (Fig.\u00a05b). Moreover, the C-terminal portion of FUS3 downstream of the B3 domain includes", " structural similarities of FUS3 and ABI3 contribute to this synergism.\nSo far, FUS3 is the smallest member of the protein family characterized by VP1/ABI3-like B3 domains (Fig.\u00a06). VP1 and  [CLS] ABI3, as well as their presumed orthologs in bean (Bobb et\u00a0al. 1995) or rice (Hattori et\u00a0al. 1994), have two additional basic domains, B1 and B2 (Giraudat et\u00a0al. 1992 ;Hill et\u00a0al. 1996), preceding B3 [CLS] . In FUS3, B1 is absent but, to a small extent, there is sequence similarity to B2 (Fig.\u00a05b). Moreover, the C-terminal portion of FUS3 downstream of the B3 domain includes"]]
["seedev_train_976", [" than 100 amino acids, about one-third of the FUS3 sequence, which exhibits significant sequence similarity to a distinct domain, B3 or basic region 3 (Giraudat et\u00a0al. 1992), characteristic of  [CLS] VP1/ABI3-like proteins. These factors are transcriptional regulators, most of them involved in the control of seed maturation [CLS]  (Bobb et\u00a0al. 1995 ;Hattori et\u00a0al. 1994 ;Hoecker et\u00a0al. 1995 ;McCarty et\u00a0al. 1991 ;Nakagawa et\u00a0al. 1996 ;Nambara et\u00a0al. 1992 ;Nambara et\u00a0al. 1995 ;Ooms et\u00a0al. 1993 ;Parcy et\u00a0al. 1994). Recently, a"]]
["seedev_train_977", [" FUS3 transcript becomes detectable\u00a02 d.a.p. paralleled by the appearance of the ABI3 mRNA. The finding of co-expression at differing levels, however, is consistent with the fact that FUS3 and  [CLS] ABI3, in a combinatorial and synergistic fashion, control overlapping yet not identical aspects of Arabidopsis seed maturation [CLS]  (Parcy et\u00a0al. 1997). Future studies will have to elucidate to what extent structural similarities of FUS3 and ABI3 contribute to this synergism.\nSo far, FUS3 is the smallest member"]]
["seedev_train_978", [" been described (Ulmasov et\u00a0al. 1997). However, the B3 domains present in several of these proteins have less resemblance to FUS3, VP1, ABI3 (Fig.\u00a05a), as well as to the presumed  [CLS] VP1/ABI3 [CLS]  orthologs of rice and bean (Bobb et\u00a0al. 1995 ;Hattori et\u00a0al. 1994) which can be grouped together.\nIt is known that the B3 domain of VP1, when taken out of"]]
["seedev_train_979", [" apparently critical residues are located within a stretch of more than 100 amino acids, about one-third of the FUS3 sequence, which exhibits significant sequence similarity to a distinct domain,  [CLS] B3 or basic region 3 [CLS]  (Giraudat et\u00a0al. 1992), characteristic of VP1/ABI3-like proteins. These factors are transcriptional regulators, most of them involved in the control of seed maturation (Bobb et\u00a0al. 1995 ;Hattori et\u00a0al. 1994 ;Hoecker"]]
["seedev_train_980", [" (Fig.\u00a05a), as well as to the presumed VP1/ABI3 orthologs of rice and bean (Bobb et\u00a0al. 1995 ;Hattori et\u00a0al. 1994) which can be grouped together.\nIt is known that the  [CLS] B3 domain of VP1, when taken out of its native context, binds in\u00a0vitro to the DNA element TCCATGCAT [CLS]  (Suzuki et\u00a0al. 1997). It is likely, therefore, that the B3 domain of FUS3 similarly mediates binding to specific promoter sequences (B\u00e4umlein et\u00a0al. 1994). The same applies to ABI3 (Nambara"]]
["seedev_train_981", [" (Fig.\u00a05a), as well as to the presumed VP1/ABI3 orthologs of rice and bean (Bobb et\u00a0al. 1995 ;Hattori et\u00a0al. 1994) which can be grouped together.\nIt is known that the  [CLS] B3 domain of VP1, when taken out of its native context, binds in\u00a0vitro [CLS]  to the DNA element TCCATGCAT (Suzuki et\u00a0al. 1997). It is likely, therefore, that the B3 domain of FUS3 similarly mediates binding to specific promoter sequences (B\u00e4umlein et\u00a0al. 1994). The"]]
["seedev_train_982", [" bean (Bobb et\u00a0al. 1995 ;Hattori et\u00a0al. 1994) which can be grouped together.\nIt is known that the B3 domain of VP1, when taken out of its native context, binds  [CLS] in\u00a0vitro to the DNA element TCCATGCAT [CLS]  (Suzuki et\u00a0al. 1997). It is likely, therefore, that the B3 domain of FUS3 similarly mediates binding to specific promoter sequences (B\u00e4umlein et\u00a0al. 1994). The same applies to ABI3 (Nambara"]]
["seedev_train_983", [" FUS3 transcript becomes detectable\u00a02 d.a.p. paralleled by the appearance of the ABI3 mRNA. The finding of co-expression at differing levels, however, is consistent with the fact that FUS3 and  [CLS] ABI3, in a combinatorial and synergistic fashion, control overlapping yet not identical aspects of Arabidopsis [CLS]  seed maturation (Parcy et\u00a0al. 1997). Future studies will have to elucidate to what extent structural similarities of FUS3 and ABI3 contribute to this synergism.\nSo far, FUS3 is the"]]
["seedev_dev_0", [" embryos are at the late-heart to early-torpedo stage of development in terms of morphogenesis but have large primordia at\nthe shoot apex (Conway and Poethig, 1997). We found that  [CLS] AGL15 accumulated to higher levels in the secondary cotyledons [CLS]  that developed from these primordia than in\nleaves of the same age.\nThe results of our study of organs produced during precocious germination in oilseed rape indicate that AGL15", " dandelion embryos indicate that the absence of a fertilization event does not preclude accumulation\nof AGL15. In dandelion, embryos arise via apomixis, which is a form of asexual reproduction.  [CLS] AGL15-related protein accumulates\nin the same pattern in these asexual embryos [CLS]  as it does in zygotic embryos that arise following a fertilization event (Perry et al., 1996).\nThe results of our study of the xtc2 mutant of Arabidopsis indicate that", " cotyledons that developed from these primordia than in\nleaves of the same age.\nThe results of our study of organs produced during precocious germination in oilseed rape indicate that  [CLS] AGL15 also accumulates\nin cotyledons that are initiated outside of the seed environment [CLS] . When immature oilseed rape embryos were excised and placed\ninto culture, they produced three different kinds of organs: secondary cotyledons, leaves, and chimeric organs, with large\nsectors of cotyledon", " levels somehow enhance the embryogenic potential of alfalfa leaf cells? AGL15\naccumulation did not appear to be sufficient to confer an embryonic identity on a cell or cells: the  [CLS] floral organs of plants\noverexpressing AGL15 accumulated AGL15 [CLS]  (Fig. 1c) but maintained their identity as reproductive tissues. However, AGL15 may be necessary to either direct or support development\nin an embryonic mode. The fact that immature oilseed", " [CLS] AGL15 accumulated at its highest levels in the products of double fertilization [CLS]  (the embryo, suspensor,\nand endosperm) following sexual reproduction in angiosperms and was maintained at high levels in immature embryos (Perry et al., 1996). If AGL15 is important for development", " plants. In every case, whenever embryos\nor embryonic organs were present, relatively high levels of AGL15-related proteins could be detected as well.\nThe results of our study of dandelion  [CLS] embryos indicate that the absence of a fertilization event does not preclude accumulation\nof AGL15 [CLS] . In dandelion, embryos arise via apomixis, which is a form of asexual reproduction. AGL15-related protein accumulates\nin the same pattern in these asexual embryos as it does in zygotic", " accumulated AGL15 (Fig. 1c) but maintained their identity as reproductive tissues. However, AGL15 may be necessary to either direct or support development\nin an embryonic mode. The fact that  [CLS] immature oilseed rape microspores accumulated low but detectable amounts of AGL15 [CLS]  and\nalso had embryogenic potential that can be expressed in culture may be significant in this regard.\n", " even when embryos arise de novo\nfrom cells in other phases of the life cycle. Immature oilseed rape microspores can be induced to develop into pollen, calli,\nor embryos.  [CLS] AGL15 was undetectable in the nuclei of fully mature pollen and in the cells in unorganized masses [CLS] . Only the cells\nthat took on an embryonic identity accumulated higher levels of AGL15. The accumulation pattern of AGL15-related proteins\nwas even more interesting in alfalfa, where embryos were", " even when embryos arise de novo\nfrom cells in other phases of the life cycle. Immature oilseed rape microspores can be induced to develop into pollen, calli,\nor embryos.  [CLS] AGL15 was undetectable in the nuclei of fully mature pollen [CLS]  and in the cells in unorganized masses. Only the cells\nthat took on an embryonic identity accumulated higher levels of AGL15. The accumulation pattern of AGL15-related proteins\nwas even", " can be induced to develop into pollen, calli,\nor embryos. AGL15 was undetectable in the nuclei of fully mature pollen and in the cells in unorganized masses. Only the  [CLS] cells\nthat took on an embryonic identity accumulated higher levels of AGL15 [CLS] . The accumulation pattern of AGL15-related proteins\nwas even more interesting in alfalfa, where embryos were obtained by culturing mature leaf tissue. Immunoreactive protein\nwas present at relatively high levels", " as it does in zygotic embryos that arise following a fertilization event (Perry et al., 1996).\nThe results of our study of the xtc2 mutant of Arabidopsis indicate that  [CLS] AGL15 accumulates in organs with embryonic features [CLS]  (i.e. cotyledons) even if they initiate\nduring later stages of embryogeny and develop largely after germination. In the xtc2 mutant of Arabidopsis, secondary cotyledons appear as a result of", " dandelion embryos indicate that the absence of a fertilization event does not preclude accumulation\nof AGL15. In dandelion, embryos arise via apomixis, which is a form of asexual reproduction.  [CLS] AGL15-related protein accumulates\nin the same pattern in these asexual embryos as it does in zygotic embryos [CLS]  that arise following a fertilization event (Perry et al., 1996).\nThe results of our study of the xtc2 mutant of Arabidopsis indicate that AGL15 accumulates in organs with embryonic", " [CLS] AGL15 accumulated at its highest levels in the products of double fertilization (the embryo, suspensor,\nand endosperm) following sexual reproduction in angiosperms and was maintained at high levels in immature embryos [CLS]  (Perry et al., 1996). If AGL15 is important for development in an embryonic mode, as this pattern of accumulation might suggest, we would also\nexpect to find relatively high", " embryos are at the late-heart to early-torpedo stage of development in terms of morphogenesis but have large primordia at\nthe shoot apex (Conway and Poethig, 1997). We found that  [CLS] AGL15 accumulated to higher levels in the secondary cotyledons that developed from these primordia than in\nleaves [CLS]  of the same age.\nThe results of our study of organs produced during precocious germination in oilseed rape indicate that AGL15 also accumulates\nin cotyledons that are initiated outside", " wide variety of tissues that develop in an embryonic mode (Heck et\u00a0al., 1995; Perry et\u00a0al., 1996, 1999; Rounsley et\u00a0al., 1995), and constitutive expression promotes somatic embryogenesis (Harding et\u00a0al., 2003).  [CLS] AGL15 is expressed at lower levels after completion of germination in restricted sets of cells [CLS]  (Fernandez et\u00a0al., 2000). Research in our lab has identified a number of downstream targets of AGL15 (Tang and Perry, 2003; Wang et\u00a0al., 2002; Wang et\u00a0al., 2004; Zhu and Perry,", " motif, but SEU has been shown to associate in vivo with an AG cis-regulatory region containing a putative CArG motif, perhaps through binding to DNA-bound SEP3 (Sridhar et\u00a0al., 2006).\n [CLS] AGL15 preferentially accumulates in a wide variety of tissues that develop in an embryonic mode [CLS]  (Heck et\u00a0al., 1995; Perry et\u00a0al., 1996, 1999; Rounsley et\u00a0al., 1995), and constitutive expression promotes somatic embryogenesis (Harding et\u00a0al., 2003). AGL15 is expressed at lower levels after completion of germination"]]
["seedev_dev_1", [" in alfalfa, where embryos were obtained by culturing mature leaf tissue. Immunoreactive protein\nwas present at relatively high levels in the leaf mesophyll cells of alfalfa.\nDetectable amounts of  [CLS] AGL15-related proteins did not accumulate in the mature leaf tissues of oilseed rape, Arabidopsis (Heck et al., 1995;Perry et al., 1996; and S.E. Perry, personal observation), tomato (M.D. Lehti, personal observation), or maize (S.-C. Fang, personal observation);\nhowever, they did accumulate in the mature leaf tissues [CLS]  of pea, another legume (M.D. Lehti, personal observation). Does the\naccumulation of AGL15-related protein at high levels somehow enhance the embryogenic potential of alfalfa leaf cells? AGL15\naccumulation did", " in alfalfa, where embryos were obtained by culturing mature leaf tissue. Immunoreactive protein\nwas present at relatively high levels in the leaf mesophyll cells of alfalfa.\nDetectable amounts of  [CLS] AGL15-related proteins did not accumulate in the mature leaf tissues [CLS]  of oilseed rape, Arabidopsis (Heck et al., 1995;Perry et al., 1996; and S.E. Perry, personal observation), tomato (M.D. Lehti, personal observation), or maize (S.-C. Fang, personal observation);\nhowever, they", " than fertilization of the egg. We have used AGL15-specific\nantibodies to examine developmental situations of this type in a variety of flowering plants. In every case, whenever embryos\nor  [CLS] embryonic organs were present, relatively high levels of AGL15-related proteins [CLS]  could be detected as well.\nThe results of our study of dandelion embryos indicate that the absence of a fertilization event does not preclude accumulation\nof AGL15. In dandelion,", " means other than fertilization of the egg. We have used AGL15-specific\nantibodies to examine developmental situations of this type in a variety of flowering plants. In every case, whenever  [CLS] embryos\nor embryonic organs were present, relatively high levels of AGL15-related proteins [CLS]  could be detected as well.\nThe results of our study of dandelion embryos indicate that the absence of a fertilization event does not preclude accumulation\nof AGL15. In dandelion,"]]
["seedev_dev_2", [" the products of double fertilization (the embryo, suspensor,\nand endosperm) following sexual reproduction in angiosperms and was maintained at high levels in immature embryos (Perry et al., 1996). If  [CLS] AGL15 is important for development in an embryonic mode [CLS] , as this pattern of accumulation might suggest, we would also\nexpect to find relatively high levels of AGL15 or AGL15-related proteins in developmental contexts where embryos or organs\nwith", " motif, but SEU has been shown to associate in vivo with an AG cis-regulatory region containing a putative CArG motif, perhaps through binding to DNA-bound SEP3 (Sridhar et\u00a0al., 2006).\n [CLS] AGL15 preferentially accumulates in a wide variety of tissues that develop in an embryonic mode (Heck et\u00a0al., 1995; Perry et\u00a0al., 1996, 1999; Rounsley et\u00a0al., 1995), and constitutive expression promotes somatic embryogenesis [CLS]  (Harding et\u00a0al., 2003). AGL15 is expressed at lower levels after completion of germination in restricted sets of cells (Fernandez et\u00a0al., 2000). Research in our lab has identified a number"]]
["seedev_dev_3", [" found that AGL15 accumulated to higher levels in the secondary cotyledons that developed from these primordia than in\nleaves of the same age.\nThe results of our study of  [CLS] organs produced during precocious germination [CLS]  in oilseed rape indicate that AGL15 also accumulates\nin cotyledons that are initiated outside of the seed environment. When immature oilseed rape embryos were excised and placed\ninto culture,"]]
["seedev_dev_4", [" germination. In the xtc2 mutant of Arabidopsis, secondary cotyledons appear as a result of changes in the relative timing of embryo and shoot apex\ndevelopment (Conway and Poethig, 1997).  [CLS] xtc2 embryo development [CLS]  is delayed, but shoot apex development initiates precociously. Maturation-stagextc2 embryos are at the late-heart to early-torpedo stage of development in terms of morphogenesis but have large primordia at\nthe"]]
["seedev_dev_5", [" germination. In the xtc2 mutant of Arabidopsis, secondary cotyledons appear as a result of changes in the relative timing of embryo and shoot apex\ndevelopment (Conway and Poethig, 1997).  [CLS] xtc2 embryo development is delayed, but shoot apex development initiates precociously [CLS] . Maturation-stagextc2 embryos are at the late-heart to early-torpedo stage of development in terms of morphogenesis but have large primordia at\nthe shoot apex (Conway and Poethig, 1997). We found", " a result of changes in the relative timing of embryo and shoot apex\ndevelopment (Conway and Poethig, 1997). xtc2 embryo development is delayed, but shoot apex development initiates precociously. Maturation-stage [CLS] xtc2 embryos are at the late-heart to early-torpedo stage of development in terms of morphogenesis but have large primordia [CLS]  at\nthe shoot apex (Conway and Poethig, 1997). We found that AGL15 accumulated to higher levels in the secondary cotyledons that developed from these primordia than in\nleaves of"]]
["seedev_dev_6", [" mature leaf tissues of pea, another legume (M.D. Lehti, personal observation). Does the\naccumulation of AGL15-related protein at high levels somehow enhance the embryogenic potential of alfalfa leaf cells?  [CLS] AGL15\naccumulation did not appear to be sufficient to confer an embryonic identity on a cell [CLS]  or cells: the floral organs of plants\noverexpressing AGL15 accumulated AGL15 (Fig. 1c) but maintained their identity as reproductive tissues. However, AGL15 may be necessary to either direct or", " mature leaf tissues of pea, another legume (M.D. Lehti, personal observation). Does the\naccumulation of AGL15-related protein at high levels somehow enhance the embryogenic potential of alfalfa leaf cells?  [CLS] AGL15\naccumulation did not appear to be sufficient to confer an embryonic identity on a cell or cells [CLS] : the floral organs of plants\noverexpressing AGL15 accumulated AGL15 (Fig. 1c) but maintained their identity as reproductive tissues. However, AGL15 may be necessary to either direct or support development", " to confer an embryonic identity on a cell or cells: the floral organs of plants\noverexpressing AGL15 accumulated AGL15 (Fig. 1c) but maintained their identity as reproductive tissues. However,  [CLS] AGL15 may be necessary to either direct or support development\nin an embryonic mode [CLS] . The fact that immature oilseed rape microspores accumulated low but detectable amounts of AGL15 and\nalso had embryogenic potential that can be expressed in culture may be significant in", " a shorter vegetative\nphase than do wild-type plants, resulting in fewer rosette leaves and earlier flowering (reviewed in Ma 1998). Given the accumulation pattern of AGL15 in wild-type plants,  [CLS] AGL15 might act by prolonging or promoting the early juvenile\nphase [CLS]  in the transgenic plants; that is, it may \"juvenilize\" the plants. Effects at the beginning of the juvenile phase would\ntranslate into a delay in flowering because competence to"]]
["seedev_dev_7", [" al., 1996). If AGL15 is important for development in an embryonic mode, as this pattern of accumulation might suggest, we would also\nexpect to find relatively high levels of  [CLS] AGL15 or AGL15-related proteins [CLS]  in developmental contexts where embryos or organs\nwith embryonic tissue arise outside of the seed or by means other than fertilization of the egg. We have used AGL15-specific\nantibodies", " the number of MADS-domain proteins, with the Arabidopsis genome encoding 107 members, 39 members of which are in the MIKC subfamily (for a review, see Parenicov\u00e1et\u00a0al., 2003).\nAGAMOUS-like 15 ( [CLS] AGL15; At5g13790) is a member of the MIKC subfamily [CLS] , which consist of four domains: the MADS (M), I, K, and C domains (for a review, see Kaufmann et\u00a0al., 2005). The MADS domain itself is comprised of 55\u201360 highly"]]
["seedev_dev_8", [" present, despite\nthe fact that these organs initiated after the maternal tissues were removed and often after an extended period in culture.\nFinally, the results of our studies of  [CLS] somatic embryogenesis indicate that AGL15 [CLS]  accumulates even when embryos arise de novo\nfrom cells in other phases of the life cycle. Immature oilseed rape microspores can be induced to develop into pollen, calli,\nor"]]
["seedev_dev_9", [" in alfalfa, where embryos were obtained by culturing mature leaf tissue. Immunoreactive protein\nwas present at relatively high levels in the leaf mesophyll cells of alfalfa.\nDetectable amounts of  [CLS] AGL15-related proteins did not accumulate in the mature leaf tissues of oilseed rape, Arabidopsis (Heck et al., 1995;Perry et al., 1996; and S.E. Perry, personal observation), tomato [CLS]  (M.D. Lehti, personal observation), or maize (S.-C. Fang, personal observation);\nhowever, they did accumulate in the mature leaf tissues of pea, another legume (M.D. Lehti, personal observation). Does the", " in alfalfa, where embryos were obtained by culturing mature leaf tissue. Immunoreactive protein\nwas present at relatively high levels in the leaf mesophyll cells of alfalfa.\nDetectable amounts of  [CLS] AGL15-related proteins did not accumulate in the mature leaf tissues of oilseed rape [CLS] , Arabidopsis (Heck et al., 1995;Perry et al., 1996; and S.E. Perry, personal observation), tomato (M.D. Lehti, personal observation), or maize (S.-C. Fang, personal observation);\nhowever, they did accumulate in", " in alfalfa, where embryos were obtained by culturing mature leaf tissue. Immunoreactive protein\nwas present at relatively high levels in the leaf mesophyll cells of alfalfa.\nDetectable amounts of  [CLS] AGL15-related proteins did not accumulate in the mature leaf tissues of oilseed rape, Arabidopsis (Heck et al., 1995;Perry et al., 1996; and S.E. Perry, personal observation), tomato (M.D. Lehti, personal observation), or maize (S.-C. Fang, personal observation);\nhowever, they did accumulate in the mature leaf tissues of pea [CLS] , another legume (M.D. Lehti, personal observation). Does the\naccumulation of AGL15-related protein at high levels somehow enhance the embryogenic potential of alfalfa leaf cells? AGL15\naccumulation did not appear", " in alfalfa, where embryos were obtained by culturing mature leaf tissue. Immunoreactive protein\nwas present at relatively high levels in the leaf mesophyll cells of alfalfa.\nDetectable amounts of  [CLS] AGL15-related proteins did not accumulate in the mature leaf tissues of oilseed rape, Arabidopsis [CLS]  (Heck et al., 1995;Perry et al., 1996; and S.E. Perry, personal observation), tomato (M.D. Lehti, personal observation), or maize (S.-C. Fang, personal observation);\nhowever, they did accumulate in the", " in alfalfa, where embryos were obtained by culturing mature leaf tissue. Immunoreactive protein\nwas present at relatively high levels in the leaf mesophyll cells of alfalfa.\nDetectable amounts of  [CLS] AGL15-related proteins did not accumulate in the mature leaf tissues of oilseed rape, Arabidopsis (Heck et al., 1995;Perry et al., 1996; and S.E. Perry, personal observation), tomato (M.D. Lehti, personal observation), or maize [CLS]  (S.-C. Fang, personal observation);\nhowever, they did accumulate in the mature leaf tissues of pea, another legume (M.D. Lehti, personal observation). Does the\naccumulation of AGL15-related protein at high", " outside of the seed or by means other than fertilization of the egg. We have used AGL15-specific\nantibodies to examine developmental situations of this type in a variety of  [CLS] flowering plants. In every case, whenever embryos\nor embryonic organs were present, relatively high levels of AGL15-related proteins [CLS]  could be detected as well.\nThe results of our study of dandelion embryos indicate that the absence of a fertilization event does not preclude accumulation\nof AGL15. In dandelion,"]]
["seedev_dev_10", [" levels in the secondary cotyledons that developed from these primordia than in\nleaves of the same age.\nThe results of our study of organs produced during precocious germination in  [CLS] oilseed rape indicate that AGL15 [CLS]  also accumulates\nin cotyledons that are initiated outside of the seed environment. When immature oilseed rape embryos were excised and placed\ninto culture, they produced three different kinds of", " the embryogenic potential of alfalfa leaf cells? AGL15\naccumulation did not appear to be sufficient to confer an embryonic identity on a cell or cells: the floral organs of  [CLS] plants\noverexpressing AGL15 accumulated AGL15 [CLS]  (Fig. 1c) but maintained their identity as reproductive tissues. However, AGL15 may be necessary to either direct or support development\nin an embryonic mode. The fact that immature oilseed", " [CLS] AGL15 accumulated at its highest levels in the products of double fertilization (the embryo, suspensor,\nand endosperm) following sexual reproduction in angiosperms [CLS]  and was maintained at high levels in immature embryos (Perry et al., 1996). If AGL15 is important for development in an embryonic mode, as this pattern of accumulation might", " flowering plants. In every case, whenever embryos\nor embryonic organs were present, relatively high levels of AGL15-related proteins could be detected as well.\nThe results of our study of  [CLS] dandelion embryos indicate that the absence of a fertilization event does not preclude accumulation\nof AGL15 [CLS] . In dandelion, embryos arise via apomixis, which is a form of asexual reproduction. AGL15-related protein accumulates\nin the same pattern in these asexual embryos as it does in zygotic", " AGL15 (Fig. 1c) but maintained their identity as reproductive tissues. However, AGL15 may be necessary to either direct or support development\nin an embryonic mode. The fact that immature  [CLS] oilseed rape microspores accumulated low but detectable amounts of AGL15 [CLS]  and\nalso had embryogenic potential that can be expressed in culture may be significant in this regard.\n", " same pattern in these asexual embryos as it does in zygotic embryos that arise following a fertilization event (Perry et al., 1996).\nThe results of our study of the  [CLS] xtc2 mutant of Arabidopsis indicate that AGL15 [CLS]  accumulates in organs with embryonic features (i.e. cotyledons) even if they initiate\nduring later stages of embryogeny and develop largely after germination. In the xtc2 mutant of Arabidopsis, secondary", " proteins could be detected as well.\nThe results of our study of dandelion embryos indicate that the absence of a fertilization event does not preclude accumulation\nof AGL15. In  [CLS] dandelion, embryos arise via apomixis, which is a form of asexual reproduction. AGL15 [CLS] -related protein accumulates\nin the same pattern in these asexual embryos as it does in zygotic embryos that arise following a fertilization event (Perry et al., 1996).\nThe results of", " with PISTILLATA, typically have a shorter vegetative\nphase than do wild-type plants, resulting in fewer rosette leaves and earlier flowering (reviewed in Ma 1998). Given the accumulation pattern of  [CLS] AGL15 in wild-type plants [CLS] , AGL15 might act by prolonging or promoting the early juvenile\nphase in the transgenic plants; that is, it may \"juvenilize\" the plants. Effects at the beginning of the juvenile", " a shorter vegetative\nphase than do wild-type plants, resulting in fewer rosette leaves and earlier flowering (reviewed in Ma 1998). Given the accumulation pattern of AGL15 in wild-type plants,  [CLS] AGL15 might act by prolonging or promoting the early juvenile\nphase in the transgenic plants [CLS] ; that is, it may \"juvenilize\" the plants. Effects at the beginning of the juvenile phase would\ntranslate into a delay in flowering because competence to flower is acquired in", " [CLS] AGL15 with members of the SIN3/HDAC1 complex suggests a mechanism that could explain its function as a transcriptional repressor in planta [CLS] \nHistone deacetylase (HDAC) enzymes remove acetyl groups from histones, and hypoacetylation results in a decrease in the space between the nucleosome and the DNA that is wrapped around it."]]
["seedev_dev_11", [" accumulated to higher levels in the secondary cotyledons that developed from these primordia than in\nleaves of the same age.\nThe results of our study of organs produced during  [CLS] precocious germination in oilseed rape [CLS]  indicate that AGL15 also accumulates\nin cotyledons that are initiated outside of the seed environment. When immature oilseed rape embryos were excised and placed\ninto culture, they produced three"]]
["seedev_dev_12", [" present, despite\nthe fact that these organs initiated after the maternal tissues were removed and often after an extended period in culture.\nFinally, the results of our studies of  [CLS] somatic embryogenesis indicate that AGL15 accumulates even when embryos [CLS]  arise de novo\nfrom cells in other phases of the life cycle. Immature oilseed rape microspores can be induced to develop into pollen, calli,\nor embryos. AGL15 was undetectable"]]
["seedev_dev_13", [" found that AGL15 accumulated to higher levels in the secondary cotyledons that developed from these primordia than in\nleaves of the same age.\nThe results of our study of  [CLS] organs produced during precocious germination in oilseed rape [CLS]  indicate that AGL15 also accumulates\nin cotyledons that are initiated outside of the seed environment. When immature oilseed rape embryos were excised and placed\ninto culture, they produced three"]]
["seedev_dev_14", [" In the xtc2 mutant of Arabidopsis, secondary cotyledons appear as a result of changes in the relative timing of embryo and shoot apex\ndevelopment (Conway and Poethig, 1997). xtc2  [CLS] embryo development is delayed, but shoot apex development initiates precociously [CLS] . Maturation-stagextc2 embryos are at the late-heart to early-torpedo stage of development in terms of morphogenesis but have large primordia at\nthe shoot apex (Conway and Poethig, 1997). We found"]]
["seedev_dev_15", [" 1997). xtc2 embryo development is delayed, but shoot apex development initiates precociously. Maturation-stagextc2 embryos are at the late-heart to early-torpedo stage of development in terms of morphogenesis but have  [CLS] large primordia at\nthe shoot apex [CLS]  (Conway and Poethig, 1997). We found that AGL15 accumulated to higher levels in the secondary cotyledons that developed from these primordia than in\nleaves of the same age.\nThe"]]
["seedev_dev_16", [" the relative timing of embryo and shoot apex\ndevelopment (Conway and Poethig, 1997). xtc2 embryo development is delayed, but shoot apex development initiates precociously. Maturation-stagextc2 embryos are at the  [CLS] late-heart to early-torpedo stage of development in terms of morphogenesis but have large primordia [CLS]  at\nthe shoot apex (Conway and Poethig, 1997). We found that AGL15 accumulated to higher levels in the secondary cotyledons that developed from these primordia than in\nleaves of"]]
["seedev_dev_17", [" that these organs initiated after the maternal tissues were removed and often after an extended period in culture.\nFinally, the results of our studies of somatic embryogenesis indicate that  [CLS] AGL15 accumulates even when embryos [CLS]  arise de novo\nfrom cells in other phases of the life cycle. Immature oilseed rape microspores can be induced to develop into pollen, calli,\nor embryos. AGL15 was undetectable"]]
["seedev_dev_18", [" [CLS] plants that overexpress floral MADS factors, such as AP1, AG, or AP3 with PISTILLATA, typically have a shorter vegetative\nphase than do wild-type plants, resulting in fewer rosette leaves and earlier flowering [CLS]  (reviewed in Ma 1998). Given the accumulation pattern of AGL15 in wild-type plants, AGL15 might act by prolonging or promoting the early juvenile\nphase in the transgenic plants; that", " [CLS] plants that overexpress floral MADS factors, such as AP1, AG, or AP3 with PISTILLATA, typically have a shorter vegetative\nphase [CLS]  than do wild-type plants, resulting in fewer rosette leaves and earlier flowering (reviewed in Ma 1998). Given the accumulation pattern of AGL15 in wild-type plants, AGL15 might act by", " [CLS] plants that overexpress floral MADS factors, such as AP1, AG, or AP3 with PISTILLATA, typically have a shorter vegetative\nphase than do wild-type plants, resulting in fewer rosette leaves [CLS]  and earlier flowering (reviewed in Ma 1998). Given the accumulation pattern of AGL15 in wild-type plants, AGL15 might act by prolonging or promoting the early juvenile\nphase in the"]]
["seedev_dev_19", [" [CLS] plants that overexpress floral MADS factors, such as AP1, AG, or AP3 with PISTILLATA, typically have a shorter vegetative\nphase than do wild-type plants, resulting in fewer rosette leaves and earlier flowering [CLS]  (reviewed in Ma 1998). Given the accumulation pattern of AGL15 in wild-type plants, AGL15 might act by prolonging or promoting the early juvenile\nphase in the transgenic plants; that", " [CLS] plants that overexpress floral MADS factors, such as AP1, AG, or AP3 with PISTILLATA, typically have a shorter vegetative\nphase [CLS]  than do wild-type plants, resulting in fewer rosette leaves and earlier flowering (reviewed in Ma 1998). Given the accumulation pattern of AGL15 in wild-type plants, AGL15 might act by", " [CLS] plants that overexpress floral MADS factors, such as AP1, AG, or AP3 with PISTILLATA, typically have a shorter vegetative\nphase than do wild-type plants, resulting in fewer rosette leaves [CLS]  and earlier flowering (reviewed in Ma 1998). Given the accumulation pattern of AGL15 in wild-type plants, AGL15 might act by prolonging or promoting the early juvenile\nphase in the"]]
["seedev_dev_20", [" [CLS] plants that overexpress floral MADS factors, such as AP1, AG, or AP3 with PISTILLATA, typically have a shorter vegetative\nphase than do wild-type plants, resulting in fewer rosette leaves [CLS]  and earlier flowering (reviewed in Ma 1998). Given the accumulation pattern of AGL15 in wild-type plants, AGL15 might act by prolonging or promoting the early juvenile\nphase in the", " [CLS] plants that overexpress floral MADS factors, such as AP1, AG, or AP3 with PISTILLATA, typically have a shorter vegetative\nphase than do wild-type plants, resulting in fewer rosette leaves and earlier flowering [CLS]  (reviewed in Ma 1998). Given the accumulation pattern of AGL15 in wild-type plants, AGL15 might act by prolonging or promoting the early juvenile\nphase in the transgenic plants; that", " [CLS] plants that overexpress floral MADS factors, such as AP1, AG, or AP3 with PISTILLATA, typically have a shorter vegetative\nphase [CLS]  than do wild-type plants, resulting in fewer rosette leaves and earlier flowering (reviewed in Ma 1998). Given the accumulation pattern of AGL15 in wild-type plants, AGL15 might act by"]]
["seedev_dev_21", [" of leaf shape is too complex (reviewed in Poethig 1997) for this character to serve as a definitive marker of phase. In Arabidopsis, a more consistent marker of the  [CLS] juvenile phase\nis the absence of trichomes on the abaxial surface of the leaf [CLS]  (Telfer et al. 1997).\n"]]
["seedev_dev_22", [" transgenes. In wild-type Arabidopsis, rounded leaves are produced during the earliest stages of vegetative growth, whereas\nincreasingly spatulate leaves are produced later (Bowman 1994 ; Poethig 1997). Although the  [CLS] change in leaf shape suggests a more juvenile mode of morphogenesis in the transgenic plants [CLS] , leaf shape is\ntoo variable and the regulation of leaf shape is too complex (reviewed in Poethig 1997) for this character to serve as a definitive marker of phase.", " resulting in fewer rosette leaves and earlier flowering (reviewed in Ma 1998). Given the accumulation pattern of AGL15 in wild-type plants, AGL15 might act by prolonging or promoting the  [CLS] early juvenile\nphase in the transgenic plants [CLS] ; that is, it may \"juvenilize\" the plants. Effects at the beginning of the juvenile phase would\ntranslate into a delay in flowering because competence to flower is acquired in"]]
["seedev_dev_23", [" inductive signals before flowering.\nThe petioles of the cotyledons and rosette leaves were considerably shorter and the leaf blades were shorter and rounder in\nplants carrying AGL15 transgenes. In  [CLS] wild-type Arabidopsis, rounded leaves are produced during the earliest stages of vegetative growth, whereas\nincreasingly spatulate leaves [CLS]  are produced later (Bowman 1994 ; Poethig 1997). Although the change in leaf shape suggests a more juvenile mode of morphogenesis in the transgenic plants, leaf shape is\ntoo"]]
["seedev_dev_24", [" [CLS] floral MADS factors, such as AP1, AG, or AP3 [CLS]  with PISTILLATA, typically have a shorter vegetative\nphase than do wild-type plants, resulting in fewer rosette leaves and earlier flowering (reviewed in Ma 1998). Given the accumulation pattern of"]]
["seedev_dev_25", [" [CLS] floral MADS factors, such as AP1, AG [CLS] , or AP3 with PISTILLATA, typically have a shorter vegetative\nphase than do wild-type plants, resulting in fewer rosette leaves and earlier flowering (reviewed in Ma 1998). Given the accumulation"]]
["seedev_dev_26", [" [CLS] floral MADS factors, such as AP1 [CLS] , AG, or AP3 with PISTILLATA, typically have a shorter vegetative\nphase than do wild-type plants, resulting in fewer rosette leaves and earlier flowering (reviewed in Ma 1998). Given the"]]
["seedev_dev_27", [" shape is\ntoo variable and the regulation of leaf shape is too complex (reviewed in Poethig 1997) for this character to serve as a definitive marker of phase. In  [CLS] Arabidopsis, a more consistent marker of the juvenile phase\nis the absence of trichomes on the abaxial surface of the leaf [CLS]  (Telfer et al. 1997).\n"]]
["seedev_dev_28", [" three transcription factors participate in combinatorial control of gene expression, possibly by forming a regulatory complex mediating seed-specific or ABA-inducible expression. Consistent with this, rice homologs of ABI3 and  [CLS] ABI5 (OSVP1 and TRAB1 [CLS] , respectively) have been shown to interact in a yeast two-hybrid assay, as well as in transient assays in plant cells (Hobo et\u00a0al., 1999).\nThe two remaining cloned ABI loci,"]]
["seedev_dev_29", [" but the intact purified protein does not specifically bind DNA in vitro, suggesting that it interacts with other proteins that mediate DNA binding (Suzuki et\u00a0al., 1997). Mutational analyses of  [CLS] VP1/ABI3 [CLS] -responsive promoters have shown that G-box elements such as those present in the Em1a and Em1b elements, although required for ABA regulation and consequently designated ABREs, are sufficient but not"]]
["seedev_dev_30", [" and ABI2, were initially identified by dominant negative mutations resulting in decreased sensitivity to ABA (Gosti et\u00a0al., 1999; Koornneef et\u00a0al., 1984). These loci encode highly homologous members of the  [CLS] PP2C family of ser/thr protein phosphatases [CLS] , and it has been suggested that they might act on overlapping subsets of substrates (Leung et\u00a0al., 1997). However, none of their substrates has been identified to date. Both the"]]
["seedev_dev_31", [" but the intact purified protein does not specifically bind DNA in vitro, suggesting that it interacts with other proteins that mediate DNA binding (Suzuki et\u00a0al., 1997). Mutational analyses of  [CLS] VP1/ABI3-responsive promoters [CLS]  have shown that G-box elements such as those present in the Em1a and Em1b elements, although required for ABA regulation and consequently designated ABREs, are sufficient but not necessary"]]
["seedev_dev_32", [" does not specifically bind DNA in vitro, suggesting that it interacts with other proteins that mediate DNA binding (Suzuki et\u00a0al., 1997). Mutational analyses of VP1/ABI3-responsive promoters have shown that  [CLS] G-box elements such as those present in the Em1a and Em1b elements, although required for ABA regulation and consequently designated ABREs [CLS] , are sufficient but not necessary for VP1 transactivation (Vasil et\u00a0al., 1995). These studies suggest that VP1 activates transcription through multiple cis-acting sequences, only some of which are ABREs. It"]]
["seedev_dev_33", [" to assorted environmental stresses such as drought and salinity (Leung and Giraudat, 1998). Genetic studies have identified many loci required for wild-type ABA response; the best characterized are the  [CLS] ABA insensitive (ABI [CLS] ) and enhanced response to ABA (ERA) genes of Arabidopsis and the VP1 genes of maize and other cereals (Holdsworth et\u00a0al., 1999). Many additional presumed ABA-signaling components have been identified"]]
["seedev_dev_34", [" such as drought and salinity (Leung and Giraudat, 1998). Genetic studies have identified many loci required for wild-type ABA response; the best characterized are the ABA insensitive (ABI) and  [CLS] enhanced response to ABA (ERA [CLS] ) genes of Arabidopsis and the VP1 genes of maize and other cereals (Holdsworth et\u00a0al., 1999). Many additional presumed ABA-signaling components have been identified biochemically, based on binding to cis-acting"]]
["seedev_dev_35", [" that these three transcription factors participate in combinatorial control of gene expression, possibly by forming a regulatory complex mediating seed-specific or ABA-inducible expression. Consistent with this, rice homologs of  [CLS] ABI3 and ABI5 (OSVP1 [CLS]  and TRAB1, respectively) have been shown to interact in a yeast two-hybrid assay, as well as in transient assays in plant cells (Hobo et\u00a0al., 1999).\nThe two remaining cloned"]]
["seedev_dev_36", [" site than the other bZIP proteins in that its members tolerate variability in the ACGT core element essential to the ABRE G-box (Kim et\u00a0al., 1997). Furthermore, the homology between  [CLS] ABI5 and EmBP1 is limited to the bZIP domain [CLS] . Consequently, any interactions between ABI5 and VP1/ABI3 need not be mechanistically similar to the previously described VP1\u2013EmBP1 interactions.\nPhysiological studies have shown that the ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5 loci"]]
["seedev_dev_37", [" the VP1 genes of maize and other cereals (Holdsworth et\u00a0al., 1999). Many additional presumed ABA-signaling components have been identified biochemically, based on binding to cis-acting regulatory elements such as  [CLS] ABREs (ABA-response elements [CLS] ; Busk and Pages, 1998); one- or two-hybrid screens in yeast (Choi et\u00a0al., 2000; Hobo et\u00a0al., 1999; Kim et\u00a0al., 1997; Kurup et\u00a0al., 2000; Uno et\u00a0al., 2000); or correlations between kinase"]]
["seedev_dev_38", [" core element essential to the ABRE G-box (Kim et\u00a0al., 1997). Furthermore, the homology between ABI5 and EmBP1 is limited to the bZIP domain. Consequently, any interactions between ABI5 and  [CLS] VP1/ABI3 [CLS]  need not be mechanistically similar to the previously described VP1\u2013EmBP1 interactions.\nPhysiological studies have shown that the ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5 loci have similar qualitative effects on seed development"]]
["seedev_dev_39", [" families, respectively, and regulate overlapping subsets of seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible genes (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998; Giraudat et\u00a0al., 1992). Two of these, ABI4 and ABI5, contain presumed  [CLS] DNA-binding and dimerization domains: the AP2 and bZIP domains [CLS] , respectively. ABI3 can activate transcription in vivo, but the intact purified protein does not specifically bind DNA in vitro, suggesting that it interacts with other proteins that mediate DNA"]]
["seedev_dev_40", [" and regulate overlapping subsets of seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible genes (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998; Giraudat et\u00a0al., 1992). Two of these, ABI4 and ABI5, contain presumed DNA-binding and  [CLS] dimerization domains: the AP2 and bZIP domains [CLS] , respectively. ABI3 can activate transcription in vivo, but the intact purified protein does not specifically bind DNA in vitro, suggesting that it interacts with other proteins that mediate DNA"]]
["seedev_dev_41", [" transactivation (Vasil et\u00a0al., 1995). These studies suggest that VP1 activates transcription through multiple cis-acting sequences, only some of which are ABREs. It was subsequently shown that both VP1 and  [CLS] EmBP1, an Em1a-binding bZIP protein, specifically interact with GF14 [CLS] , a 14-3-3 protein which may provide a structural link between these transcription factors (Schultz et\u00a0al., 1998). Although ABI5 is similar to EmBP1 in that they are both bZIP proteins"]]
["seedev_dev_42", [" study makes use of yeast two-hybrid assays to test for direct physical interactions among ABI gene products previously demonstrated to interact genetically. Only two of these proteins interacted directly:  [CLS] ABI3 and ABI5 [CLS] . In addition, ABI5 interacted with itself, presumably reflecting an ability to form homodimers. We mapped the interacting domains by assaying reporter activation by combination of various subdomains of ABI3", " use of yeast two-hybrid assays to test for direct physical interactions among ABI gene products previously demonstrated to interact genetically. Only two of these proteins interacted directly: ABI3 and  [CLS] ABI5. In addition, ABI5 [CLS]  interacted with itself, presumably reflecting an ability to form homodimers. We mapped the interacting domains by assaying reporter activation by combination of various subdomains of ABI3 and ABI5. In", " the ACGT core element essential to the ABRE G-box (Kim et\u00a0al., 1997). Furthermore, the homology between ABI5 and EmBP1 is limited to the bZIP domain. Consequently, any interactions between  [CLS] ABI5 and VP1/ABI3 [CLS]  need not be mechanistically similar to the previously described VP1\u2013EmBP1 interactions.\nPhysiological studies have shown that the ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5 loci have similar qualitative effects on seed development"]]
["seedev_dev_43", [" for VP1 transactivation (Vasil et\u00a0al., 1995). These studies suggest that VP1 activates transcription through multiple cis-acting sequences, only some of which are ABREs. It was subsequently shown that both  [CLS] VP1 and EmBP1, an Em1a-binding bZIP protein, specifically interact with GF14 [CLS] , a 14-3-3 protein which may provide a structural link between these transcription factors (Schultz et\u00a0al., 1998). Although ABI5 is similar to EmBP1 in that they are both bZIP proteins", " Furthermore, the homology between ABI5 and EmBP1 is limited to the bZIP domain. Consequently, any interactions between ABI5 and VP1/ABI3 need not be mechanistically similar to the previously described  [CLS] VP1\u2013EmBP1 [CLS]  interactions.\nPhysiological studies have shown that the ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5 loci have similar qualitative effects on seed development and ABA sensitivity, consistent with action in a common pathway,"]]
["seedev_dev_44", [" transcription factors participate in combinatorial control of gene expression, possibly by forming a regulatory complex mediating seed-specific or ABA-inducible expression. Consistent with this, rice homologs of ABI3 and ABI5 ( [CLS] OSVP1 and TRAB1 [CLS] , respectively) have been shown to interact in a yeast two-hybrid assay, as well as in transient assays in plant cells (Hobo et\u00a0al., 1999).\nThe two remaining cloned ABI loci,"]]
["seedev_dev_45", [" site than the other bZIP proteins in that its members tolerate variability in the ACGT core element essential to the ABRE G-box (Kim et\u00a0al., 1997). Furthermore, the homology between  [CLS] ABI5 and EmBP1 is limited to the bZIP domain [CLS] . Consequently, any interactions between ABI5 and VP1/ABI3 need not be mechanistically similar to the previously described VP1\u2013EmBP1 interactions.\nPhysiological studies have shown that the ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5 loci", " the other bZIP proteins in that its members tolerate variability in the ACGT core element essential to the ABRE G-box (Kim et\u00a0al., 1997). Furthermore, the homology between ABI5 and  [CLS] EmBP1 is limited to the bZIP domain [CLS] . Consequently, any interactions between ABI5 and VP1/ABI3 need not be mechanistically similar to the previously described VP1\u2013EmBP1 interactions.\nPhysiological studies have shown that the ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5 loci"]]
["seedev_dev_46", [" maturation, onset of seed dormancy, and adaptation to assorted environmental stresses such as drought and salinity (Leung and Giraudat, 1998). Genetic studies have identified many loci required for wild-type  [CLS] ABA response; the best characterized are the ABA insensitive (ABI) and enhanced response to ABA (ERA) genes of Arabidopsis and the VP1 [CLS]  genes of maize and other cereals (Holdsworth et\u00a0al., 1999). Many additional presumed ABA-signaling components have been identified biochemically, based on binding to cis-acting regulatory elements such as ABREs (ABA-response"]]
["seedev_dev_47", [" maturation, onset of seed dormancy, and adaptation to assorted environmental stresses such as drought and salinity (Leung and Giraudat, 1998). Genetic studies have identified many loci required for wild-type  [CLS] ABA response; the best characterized are the ABA insensitive (ABI) and enhanced response to ABA (ERA [CLS] ) genes of Arabidopsis and the VP1 genes of maize and other cereals (Holdsworth et\u00a0al., 1999). Many additional presumed ABA-signaling components have been identified biochemically, based on binding to cis-acting"]]
["seedev_dev_48", [" However, in the absence of genetic tests of function the roles of most of these components remain speculative.\nThree of the ABA insensitive loci, ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5, encode  [CLS] transcription factors of the B3-, AP2- and bZIP-domain families [CLS] , respectively, and regulate overlapping subsets of seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible genes (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998; Giraudat et\u00a0al., 1992). Two of these, ABI4 and ABI5, contain presumed DNA-binding"]]
["seedev_dev_49", [" (ERA) genes of Arabidopsis and the VP1 genes of maize and other cereals (Holdsworth et\u00a0al., 1999). Many additional presumed ABA-signaling components have been identified biochemically, based on binding to  [CLS] cis-acting regulatory elements such as ABREs [CLS]  (ABA-response elements; Busk and Pages, 1998); one- or two-hybrid screens in yeast (Choi et\u00a0al., 2000; Hobo et\u00a0al., 1999; Kim et\u00a0al., 1997; Kurup et\u00a0al., 2000; Uno et\u00a0al., 2000); or correlations", " although required for ABA regulation and consequently designated ABREs, are sufficient but not necessary for VP1 transactivation (Vasil et\u00a0al., 1995). These studies suggest that VP1 activates transcription through multiple  [CLS] cis-acting sequences, only some of which are ABREs [CLS] . It was subsequently shown that both VP1 and EmBP1, an Em1a-binding bZIP protein, specifically interact with GF14, a 14-3-3 protein which may provide a structural link between these transcription"]]
["seedev_dev_50", [" AP2- and bZIP-domain families, respectively, and regulate overlapping subsets of seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible genes (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998; Giraudat et\u00a0al., 1992). Two of these, ABI4 and  [CLS] ABI5, contain presumed DNA-binding and dimerization domains: the AP2 and bZIP domains [CLS] , respectively. ABI3 can activate transcription in vivo, but the intact purified protein does not specifically bind DNA in vitro, suggesting that it interacts with other proteins that mediate DNA", " the B3-, AP2- and bZIP-domain families, respectively, and regulate overlapping subsets of seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible genes (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998; Giraudat et\u00a0al., 1992). Two of these,  [CLS] ABI4 and ABI5, contain presumed DNA-binding and dimerization domains: the AP2 and bZIP domains [CLS] , respectively. ABI3 can activate transcription in vivo, but the intact purified protein does not specifically bind DNA in vitro, suggesting that it interacts with other proteins that mediate DNA"]]
["seedev_dev_51", [" member of the DPBF subfamily (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000). This subfamily has a broader consensus-binding site than the other bZIP proteins in that its members tolerate variability in the  [CLS] ACGT core element essential to the ABRE G-box [CLS]  (Kim et\u00a0al., 1997). Furthermore, the homology between ABI5 and EmBP1 is limited to the bZIP domain. Consequently, any interactions between ABI5 and VP1/ABI3 need not be mechanistically similar to", " review, see Tunnacliffe and Wise, 2007). MAT promoter analyses have revealed several conserved cis-regulatory elements with functional relevance in the control of gene expression during seed maturation. Among them,  [CLS] G-box-related\nACGT elements [CLS] , RY (CATGCA), AACA, and CTTT motifs are the best described examples (for review, see Vicente-Carbajosa and Carbonero,\n2005). The corresponding associated TFs belong to the basic leucine zipper (bZIP),"]]
["seedev_dev_52", [" has been suggested that they might act on overlapping subsets of substrates (Leung et\u00a0al., 1997). However, none of their substrates has been identified to date. Both the ABI4 and  [CLS] ABI5 gene products contain ser/thr-rich domains [CLS]  that could be sites of phosphorylation (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998), consistent with the possibility that either might be a substrate for the ABI PP2Cs. Recently, two", " and it has been suggested that they might act on overlapping subsets of substrates (Leung et\u00a0al., 1997). However, none of their substrates has been identified to date. Both the  [CLS] ABI4 and ABI5 gene products contain ser/thr-rich domains [CLS]  that could be sites of phosphorylation (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998), consistent with the possibility that either might be a substrate for the ABI PP2Cs. Recently, two"]]
["seedev_dev_53", [" ABA than their monogenic parents (Finkelstein, 1994). Recent studies show extensive cross-regulation of expression among ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5 (S\u00f6derman et\u00a0al., 2000). Furthermore, ectopic expression of either ABI3 or  [CLS] ABI4 results in ABA hypersensitivity of vegetative tissues which is partly dependent on increased ABI5 expression (Parcy et\u00a0al., 1994; S\u00f6derman et\u00a0al., 2000). Taken together, these results suggest that these three transcription factors participate in combinatorial control of gene expression, possibly by forming a regulatory complex mediating seed-specific or ABA-inducible expression [CLS] . Consistent with this, rice homologs of ABI3 and ABI5 (OSVP1 and TRAB1, respectively) have been shown to interact in a yeast two-hybrid assay, as well as in transient assays"]]
["seedev_dev_54", [" but the intact purified protein does not specifically bind DNA in vitro, suggesting that it interacts with other proteins that mediate DNA binding (Suzuki et\u00a0al., 1997). Mutational analyses of  [CLS] VP1/ABI3-responsive promoters have shown that G-box elements [CLS]  such as those present in the Em1a and Em1b elements, although required for ABA regulation and consequently designated ABREs, are sufficient but not necessary for VP1 transactivation (Vasil et\u00a0al.,", " but the intact purified protein does not specifically bind DNA in vitro, suggesting that it interacts with other proteins that mediate DNA binding (Suzuki et\u00a0al., 1997). Mutational analyses of VP1/ [CLS] ABI3-responsive promoters have shown that G-box elements [CLS]  such as those present in the Em1a and Em1b elements, although required for ABA regulation and consequently designated ABREs, are sufficient but not necessary for VP1 transactivation (Vasil et\u00a0al.,"]]
["seedev_dev_55", [" resistant to ABA than their monogenic parents (Finkelstein, 1994). Recent studies show extensive cross-regulation of expression among ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5 (S\u00f6derman et\u00a0al., 2000). Furthermore, ectopic expression of either  [CLS] ABI3 or ABI4 results in ABA hypersensitivity of vegetative tissues which is partly dependent on increased ABI5 expression (Parcy et\u00a0al., 1994; S\u00f6derman et\u00a0al., 2000). Taken together, these results suggest that these three transcription factors participate in combinatorial control of gene expression, possibly by forming a regulatory complex mediating seed-specific or ABA-inducible expression [CLS] . Consistent with this, rice homologs of ABI3 and ABI5 (OSVP1 and TRAB1, respectively) have been shown to interact in a yeast two-hybrid assay, as well as in transient assays"]]
["seedev_dev_56", [" these results suggest that these three transcription factors participate in combinatorial control of gene expression, possibly by forming a regulatory complex mediating seed-specific or ABA-inducible expression. Consistent with this,  [CLS] rice homologs of ABI3 and ABI5 (OSVP1 [CLS]  and TRAB1, respectively) have been shown to interact in a yeast two-hybrid assay, as well as in transient assays in plant cells (Hobo et\u00a0al., 1999).\nThe two remaining cloned"]]
["seedev_dev_57", [" does not specifically bind DNA in vitro, suggesting that it interacts with other proteins that mediate DNA binding (Suzuki et\u00a0al., 1997). Mutational analyses of VP1/ABI3-responsive promoters have shown that  [CLS] G-box elements such as those present in the Em1a and Em1b elements [CLS] , although required for ABA regulation and consequently designated ABREs, are sufficient but not necessary for VP1 transactivation (Vasil et\u00a0al., 1995). These studies suggest that VP1 activates transcription through multiple", " does not specifically bind DNA in vitro, suggesting that it interacts with other proteins that mediate DNA binding (Suzuki et\u00a0al., 1997). Mutational analyses of VP1/ABI3-responsive promoters have shown that  [CLS] G-box elements such as those present in the Em1a and Em1b elements [CLS] , although required for ABA regulation and consequently designated ABREs, are sufficient but not necessary for VP1 transactivation (Vasil et\u00a0al., 1995). These studies suggest that VP1 activates transcription through multiple"]]
["seedev_dev_58", [" maturation, onset of seed dormancy, and adaptation to assorted environmental stresses such as drought and salinity (Leung and Giraudat, 1998). Genetic studies have identified many loci required for wild-type  [CLS] ABA response; the best characterized are the ABA insensitive (ABI [CLS] ) and enhanced response to ABA (ERA) genes of Arabidopsis and the VP1 genes of maize and other cereals (Holdsworth et\u00a0al., 1999). Many additional presumed ABA-signaling components have been identified"]]
["seedev_dev_59", [" However, in the absence of genetic tests of function the roles of most of these components remain speculative.\nThree of the ABA insensitive loci, ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5, encode  [CLS] transcription factors of the B3-, AP2- and bZIP-domain families [CLS] , respectively, and regulate overlapping subsets of seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible genes (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998; Giraudat et\u00a0al., 1992). Two of these, ABI4 and ABI5, contain presumed DNA-binding"]]
["seedev_dev_60", [" these results suggest that these three transcription factors participate in combinatorial control of gene expression, possibly by forming a regulatory complex mediating seed-specific or ABA-inducible expression. Consistent with this,  [CLS] rice homologs of ABI3 and ABI5 (OSVP1 and TRAB1 [CLS] , respectively) have been shown to interact in a yeast two-hybrid assay, as well as in transient assays in plant cells (Hobo et\u00a0al., 1999).\nThe two remaining cloned ABI loci,"]]
["seedev_dev_61", [" the B3-, AP2- and bZIP-domain families, respectively, and regulate overlapping subsets of seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible genes (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998; Giraudat et\u00a0al., 1992). Two of these,  [CLS] ABI4 and ABI5, contain presumed DNA-binding and dimerization domains: the AP2 and bZIP domains [CLS] , respectively. ABI3 can activate transcription in vivo, but the intact purified protein does not specifically bind DNA in vitro, suggesting that it interacts with other proteins that mediate DNA", " AP2- and bZIP-domain families, respectively, and regulate overlapping subsets of seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible genes (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998; Giraudat et\u00a0al., 1992). Two of these, ABI4 and  [CLS] ABI5, contain presumed DNA-binding and dimerization domains: the AP2 and bZIP domains [CLS] , respectively. ABI3 can activate transcription in vivo, but the intact purified protein does not specifically bind DNA in vitro, suggesting that it interacts with other proteins that mediate DNA"]]
["seedev_dev_62", [" However, in the absence of genetic tests of function the roles of most of these components remain speculative.\nThree of the ABA insensitive loci, ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5, encode  [CLS] transcription factors of the B3-, AP2- and bZIP-domain families [CLS] , respectively, and regulate overlapping subsets of seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible genes (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998; Giraudat et\u00a0al., 1992). Two of these, ABI4 and ABI5, contain presumed DNA-binding"]]
["seedev_dev_63", [" among ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5 (S\u00f6derman et\u00a0al., 2000). Furthermore, ectopic expression of either ABI3 or ABI4 results in ABA hypersensitivity of vegetative tissues which is partly dependent on increased  [CLS] ABI5 expression (Parcy et\u00a0al., 1994; S\u00f6derman et\u00a0al., 2000). Taken together, these results suggest that these three transcription factors participate in combinatorial control of gene expression, possibly by forming a regulatory complex mediating seed-specific or ABA-inducible expression [CLS] . Consistent with this, rice homologs of ABI3 and ABI5 (OSVP1 and TRAB1, respectively) have been shown to interact in a yeast two-hybrid assay, as well as in transient assays"]]
["seedev_dev_64", [" activity and ABA response (Leung and Giraudat, 1998). However, in the absence of genetic tests of function the roles of most of these components remain speculative.\nThree of the  [CLS] ABA insensitive loci, ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5 [CLS] , encode transcription factors of the B3-, AP2- and bZIP-domain families, respectively, and regulate overlapping subsets of seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible genes (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998; Giraudat et\u00a0al.,"]]
["seedev_dev_65", [" may provide a structural link between these transcription factors (Schultz et\u00a0al., 1998). Although ABI5 is similar to EmBP1 in that they are both bZIP proteins correlated with ABA response,  [CLS] ABI5 is a member of the DPBF subfamily [CLS]  (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000). This subfamily has a broader consensus-binding site than the other bZIP proteins in that its members tolerate variability in the ACGT core element essential to", " both VP1 and EmBP1, an Em1a-binding bZIP protein, specifically interact with GF14, a 14-3-3 protein which may provide a structural link between these transcription factors (Schultz et\u00a0al., 1998). Although  [CLS] ABI5 is similar to EmBP1 in that they are both bZIP [CLS]  proteins correlated with ABA response, ABI5 is a member of the DPBF subfamily (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000). This subfamily has a broader consensus-binding site than the other bZIP proteins", " reflects a direct or indirect effect on the phosphorylation status of these transcription factors.\nOur study makes use of yeast two-hybrid assays to test for direct physical interactions among  [CLS] ABI gene products previously demonstrated to interact genetically. Only two of these proteins interacted directly: ABI3 and ABI5 [CLS] . In addition, ABI5 interacted with itself, presumably reflecting an ability to form homodimers. We mapped the interacting domains by assaying reporter activation by combination of various subdomains of ABI3"]]
["seedev_dev_66", [" reflects a direct or indirect effect on the phosphorylation status of these transcription factors.\nOur study makes use of yeast two-hybrid assays to test for direct physical interactions among  [CLS] ABI gene products previously demonstrated to interact genetically. Only two of these proteins interacted directly: ABI3 [CLS]  and ABI5. In addition, ABI5 interacted with itself, presumably reflecting an ability to form homodimers. We mapped the interacting domains by assaying reporter activation by combination of various subdomains"]]
["seedev_dev_67", [" and TRAB1, respectively) have been shown to interact in a yeast two-hybrid assay, as well as in transient assays in plant cells (Hobo et\u00a0al., 1999).\nThe two remaining cloned  [CLS] ABI loci, ABI1 [CLS]  and ABI2, were initially identified by dominant negative mutations resulting in decreased sensitivity to ABA (Gosti et\u00a0al., 1999; Koornneef et\u00a0al., 1984). These loci encode highly homologous members of the"]]
["seedev_dev_68", [" VP1 activates transcription through multiple cis-acting sequences, only some of which are ABREs. It was subsequently shown that both VP1 and EmBP1, an Em1a-binding bZIP protein, specifically interact with  [CLS] GF14, a 14-3-3 protein [CLS]  which may provide a structural link between these transcription factors (Schultz et\u00a0al., 1998). Although ABI5 is similar to EmBP1 in that they are both bZIP proteins correlated with ABA"]]
["seedev_dev_69", [" activity and ABA response (Leung and Giraudat, 1998). However, in the absence of genetic tests of function the roles of most of these components remain speculative.\nThree of the  [CLS] ABA insensitive loci, ABI3, ABI4 [CLS]  and ABI5, encode transcription factors of the B3-, AP2- and bZIP-domain families, respectively, and regulate overlapping subsets of seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible genes (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998;"]]
["seedev_dev_70", [" that could be sites of phosphorylation (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998), consistent with the possibility that either might be a substrate for the ABI PP2Cs. Recently, two  [CLS] ABI5-related transcription factors, AREB1 and AREB2 [CLS] , were shown to promote ABA-activation of target gene expression (Uno et\u00a0al., 2000). Although this activation was repressed either by protein kinase inhibitor treatment of wild-type cells or by the"]]
["seedev_dev_71", [" these transcription factors (Schultz et\u00a0al., 1998). Although ABI5 is similar to EmBP1 in that they are both bZIP proteins correlated with ABA response, ABI5 is a member of the  [CLS] DPBF subfamily (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000). This subfamily has a broader consensus-binding site than the other bZIP [CLS]  proteins in that its members tolerate variability in the ACGT core element essential to the ABRE G-box (Kim et\u00a0al., 1997). Furthermore, the homology between ABI5 and EmBP1 is limited"]]
["seedev_dev_72", [" et\u00a0al., 1995). These studies suggest that VP1 activates transcription through multiple cis-acting sequences, only some of which are ABREs. It was subsequently shown that both VP1 and EmBP1, an  [CLS] Em1a-binding bZIP [CLS]  protein, specifically interact with GF14, a 14-3-3 protein which may provide a structural link between these transcription factors (Schultz et\u00a0al., 1998). Although ABI5 is similar to EmBP1 in that"]]
["seedev_dev_73", [" transactivation (Vasil et\u00a0al., 1995). These studies suggest that VP1 activates transcription through multiple cis-acting sequences, only some of which are ABREs. It was subsequently shown that both VP1 and  [CLS] EmBP1, an Em1a-binding bZIP [CLS]  protein, specifically interact with GF14, a 14-3-3 protein which may provide a structural link between these transcription factors (Schultz et\u00a0al., 1998). Although ABI5 is similar to EmBP1 in that", " an Em1a-binding bZIP protein, specifically interact with GF14, a 14-3-3 protein which may provide a structural link between these transcription factors (Schultz et\u00a0al., 1998). Although ABI5 is similar to  [CLS] EmBP1 in that they are both bZIP [CLS]  proteins correlated with ABA response, ABI5 is a member of the DPBF subfamily (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000). This subfamily has a broader consensus-binding site than the other bZIP proteins"]]
["seedev_dev_74", [" and TRAB1, respectively) have been shown to interact in a yeast two-hybrid assay, as well as in transient assays in plant cells (Hobo et\u00a0al., 1999).\nThe two remaining cloned  [CLS] ABI loci, ABI1 and ABI2 [CLS] , were initially identified by dominant negative mutations resulting in decreased sensitivity to ABA (Gosti et\u00a0al., 1999; Koornneef et\u00a0al., 1984). These loci encode highly homologous members of the PP2C family"]]
["seedev_dev_75", [" that could be sites of phosphorylation (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998), consistent with the possibility that either might be a substrate for the ABI PP2Cs. Recently, two  [CLS] ABI5-related transcription factors, AREB1 [CLS]  and AREB2, were shown to promote ABA-activation of target gene expression (Uno et\u00a0al., 2000). Although this activation was repressed either by protein kinase inhibitor treatment of wild-type cells or"]]
["seedev_dev_76", [" activity and ABA response (Leung and Giraudat, 1998). However, in the absence of genetic tests of function the roles of most of these components remain speculative.\nThree of the  [CLS] ABA insensitive loci, ABI3 [CLS] , ABI4 and ABI5, encode transcription factors of the B3-, AP2- and bZIP-domain families, respectively, and regulate overlapping subsets of seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible genes (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al.,"]]
["seedev_dev_77", [" and ABI2, were initially identified by dominant negative mutations resulting in decreased sensitivity to ABA (Gosti et\u00a0al., 1999; Koornneef et\u00a0al., 1984). These loci encode highly homologous members of the  [CLS] PP2C family of ser/thr protein phosphatases [CLS] , and it has been suggested that they might act on overlapping subsets of substrates (Leung et\u00a0al., 1997). However, none of their substrates has been identified to date. Both the"]]
["seedev_dev_78", [" [CLS] ABA) can regulate many agronomically important aspects of plant growth [CLS] , including seed maturation, onset of seed dormancy, and adaptation to assorted environmental stresses such as drought and salinity (Leung and Giraudat, 1998). Genetic studies have identified many loci required", " [CLS] ABA) can regulate many agronomically important aspects of plant growth, including seed maturation, onset of seed dormancy [CLS] , and adaptation to assorted environmental stresses such as drought and salinity (Leung and Giraudat, 1998). Genetic studies have identified many loci required for wild-type ABA response; the best characterized", " [CLS] ABA) can regulate many agronomically important aspects of plant growth, including seed maturation [CLS] , onset of seed dormancy, and adaptation to assorted environmental stresses such as drought and salinity (Leung and Giraudat, 1998). Genetic studies have identified many loci required for wild-type ABA"]]
["seedev_dev_79", [" phosphorylation (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998), consistent with the possibility that either might be a substrate for the ABI PP2Cs. Recently, two ABI5-related transcription factors, AREB1 and  [CLS] AREB2, were shown to promote ABA-activation of target gene expression [CLS]  (Uno et\u00a0al., 2000). Although this activation was repressed either by protein kinase inhibitor treatment of wild-type cells or by the dominant negative abi1-1 mutation, it is not known whether"]]
["seedev_dev_80", [" bZIP domain. Consequently, any interactions between ABI5 and VP1/ABI3 need not be mechanistically similar to the previously described VP1\u2013EmBP1 interactions.\nPhysiological studies have shown that the ABI3, ABI4 and  [CLS] ABI5 loci have similar qualitative effects on seed development and ABA sensitivity [CLS] , consistent with action in a common pathway, but that null mutations in ABI3 are more severe than those in ABI4 or ABI5 (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998;", " Giraudat, 1998). However, in the absence of genetic tests of function the roles of most of these components remain speculative.\nThree of the ABA insensitive loci, ABI3, ABI4 and  [CLS] ABI5, encode transcription factors of the B3-, AP2- and bZIP-domain families, respectively, and regulate overlapping subsets of seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible genes [CLS]  (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998; Giraudat et\u00a0al., 1992). Two of these, ABI4 and ABI5, contain presumed DNA-binding and dimerization domains: the AP2 and bZIP domains, respectively. ABI3", " Giraudat, 1998). However, in the absence of genetic tests of function the roles of most of these components remain speculative.\nThree of the ABA insensitive loci, ABI3, ABI4 and  [CLS] ABI5, encode transcription factors of the B3-, AP2- and bZIP-domain families, respectively, and regulate overlapping subsets of seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible genes [CLS]  (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998; Giraudat et\u00a0al., 1992). Two of these, ABI4 and ABI5, contain presumed DNA-binding and dimerization domains: the AP2 and bZIP domains, respectively. ABI3", " monogenic parents (Finkelstein, 1994). Recent studies show extensive cross-regulation of expression among ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5 (S\u00f6derman et\u00a0al., 2000). Furthermore, ectopic expression of either ABI3 or ABI4 results in  [CLS] ABA hypersensitivity of vegetative tissues which is partly dependent on increased ABI5 [CLS]  expression (Parcy et\u00a0al., 1994; S\u00f6derman et\u00a0al., 2000). Taken together, these results suggest that these three transcription factors participate in combinatorial control of gene expression, possibly by forming a regulatory"]]
["seedev_dev_81", [" bZIP domain. Consequently, any interactions between ABI5 and VP1/ABI3 need not be mechanistically similar to the previously described VP1\u2013EmBP1 interactions.\nPhysiological studies have shown that the ABI3, ABI4 and  [CLS] ABI5 loci have similar qualitative effects on seed development [CLS]  and ABA sensitivity, consistent with action in a common pathway, but that null mutations in ABI3 are more severe than those in ABI4 or ABI5 (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000;"]]
["seedev_dev_82", [" to the bZIP domain. Consequently, any interactions between ABI5 and VP1/ABI3 need not be mechanistically similar to the previously described VP1\u2013EmBP1 interactions.\nPhysiological studies have shown that the ABI3,  [CLS] ABI4 and ABI5 loci have similar qualitative effects on seed development and ABA sensitivity [CLS] , consistent with action in a common pathway, but that null mutations in ABI3 are more severe than those in ABI4 or ABI5 (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998;", " (Leung and Giraudat, 1998). However, in the absence of genetic tests of function the roles of most of these components remain speculative.\nThree of the ABA insensitive loci, ABI3,  [CLS] ABI4 and ABI5, encode transcription factors of the B3-, AP2- and bZIP-domain families, respectively, and regulate overlapping subsets of seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible genes [CLS]  (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998; Giraudat et\u00a0al., 1992). Two of these, ABI4 and ABI5, contain presumed DNA-binding and dimerization domains: the AP2 and bZIP domains, respectively. ABI3", " (Leung and Giraudat, 1998). However, in the absence of genetic tests of function the roles of most of these components remain speculative.\nThree of the ABA insensitive loci, ABI3,  [CLS] ABI4 and ABI5, encode transcription factors of the B3-, AP2- and bZIP-domain families, respectively, and regulate overlapping subsets of seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible genes [CLS]  (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998; Giraudat et\u00a0al., 1992). Two of these, ABI4 and ABI5, contain presumed DNA-binding and dimerization domains: the AP2 and bZIP domains, respectively. ABI3"]]
["seedev_dev_83", [" does not specifically bind DNA in vitro, suggesting that it interacts with other proteins that mediate DNA binding (Suzuki et\u00a0al., 1997). Mutational analyses of VP1/ABI3-responsive promoters have shown that  [CLS] G-box elements such as those present in the Em1a and Em1b elements, although required for ABA regulation and consequently designated ABREs, are sufficient but not necessary for VP1 transactivation [CLS]  (Vasil et\u00a0al., 1995). These studies suggest that VP1 activates transcription through multiple cis-acting sequences, only some of which are ABREs. It was subsequently shown that both VP1 and EmBP1,", " does not specifically bind DNA in vitro, suggesting that it interacts with other proteins that mediate DNA binding (Suzuki et\u00a0al., 1997). Mutational analyses of VP1/ABI3-responsive promoters have shown that  [CLS] G-box elements such as those present in the Em1a and Em1b elements, although required for ABA regulation [CLS]  and consequently designated ABREs, are sufficient but not necessary for VP1 transactivation (Vasil et\u00a0al., 1995). These studies suggest that VP1 activates transcription through multiple cis-acting sequences, only some of"]]
["seedev_dev_84", [" response (Leung and Giraudat, 1998). However, in the absence of genetic tests of function the roles of most of these components remain speculative.\nThree of the ABA insensitive loci,  [CLS] ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5, encode transcription factors of the B3-, AP2- and bZIP-domain families, respectively, and regulate overlapping subsets of seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible genes [CLS]  (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998; Giraudat et\u00a0al., 1992). Two of these, ABI4 and ABI5, contain presumed DNA-binding and dimerization domains: the AP2 and bZIP domains, respectively. ABI3", " limited to the bZIP domain. Consequently, any interactions between ABI5 and VP1/ABI3 need not be mechanistically similar to the previously described VP1\u2013EmBP1 interactions.\nPhysiological studies have shown that the  [CLS] ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5 loci have similar qualitative effects on seed development and ABA sensitivity [CLS] , consistent with action in a common pathway, but that null mutations in ABI3 are more severe than those in ABI4 or ABI5 (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998;", " response (Leung and Giraudat, 1998). However, in the absence of genetic tests of function the roles of most of these components remain speculative.\nThree of the ABA insensitive loci,  [CLS] ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5, encode transcription factors of the B3-, AP2- and bZIP-domain families, respectively, and regulate overlapping subsets of seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible genes [CLS]  (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998; Giraudat et\u00a0al., 1992). Two of these, ABI4 and ABI5, contain presumed DNA-binding and dimerization domains: the AP2 and bZIP domains, respectively. ABI3"]]
["seedev_dev_85", [" to the bZIP domain. Consequently, any interactions between ABI5 and VP1/ABI3 need not be mechanistically similar to the previously described VP1\u2013EmBP1 interactions.\nPhysiological studies have shown that the ABI3,  [CLS] ABI4 and ABI5 loci have similar qualitative effects on seed development [CLS]  and ABA sensitivity, consistent with action in a common pathway, but that null mutations in ABI3 are more severe than those in ABI4 or ABI5 (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000;"]]
["seedev_dev_86", [" limited to the bZIP domain. Consequently, any interactions between ABI5 and VP1/ABI3 need not be mechanistically similar to the previously described VP1\u2013EmBP1 interactions.\nPhysiological studies have shown that the  [CLS] ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5 loci have similar qualitative effects on seed development [CLS]  and ABA sensitivity, consistent with action in a common pathway, but that null mutations in ABI3 are more severe than those in ABI4 or ABI5 (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000;"]]
["seedev_dev_87", [" Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998), consistent with the possibility that either might be a substrate for the ABI PP2Cs. Recently, two ABI5-related transcription factors, AREB1 and AREB2, were shown to promote  [CLS] ABA-activation of target gene expression (Uno et\u00a0al., 2000). Although this activation was repressed either by protein kinase inhibitor treatment of wild-type cells or by the dominant negative abi1-1 mutation [CLS] , it is not known whether this reflects a direct or indirect effect on the phosphorylation status of these transcription factors.\nOur study makes use of yeast two-hybrid assays to"]]
["seedev_dev_88", [" respectively) have been shown to interact in a yeast two-hybrid assay, as well as in transient assays in plant cells (Hobo et\u00a0al., 1999).\nThe two remaining cloned ABI loci,  [CLS] ABI1 and ABI2, were initially identified by dominant negative mutations resulting in decreased sensitivity to ABA [CLS]  (Gosti et\u00a0al., 1999; Koornneef et\u00a0al., 1984). These loci encode highly homologous members of the PP2C family of ser/thr protein phosphatases, and it has been suggested that they might act"]]
["seedev_dev_89", [" Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998), consistent with the possibility that either might be a substrate for the ABI PP2Cs. Recently, two ABI5-related transcription factors, AREB1 and AREB2, were shown to promote  [CLS] ABA-activation of target gene expression (Uno et\u00a0al., 2000). Although this activation was repressed either by protein kinase inhibitor treatment [CLS]  of wild-type cells or by the dominant negative abi1-1 mutation, it is not known whether this reflects a direct or indirect effect on the phosphorylation status of these transcription"]]
["seedev_dev_90", [" sites of phosphorylation (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998), consistent with the possibility that either might be a substrate for the ABI PP2Cs. Recently, two ABI5-related transcription factors,  [CLS] AREB1 and AREB2, were shown to promote ABA-activation of target gene expression [CLS]  (Uno et\u00a0al., 2000). Although this activation was repressed either by protein kinase inhibitor treatment of wild-type cells or by the dominant negative abi1-1 mutation, it is not known whether"]]
["seedev_dev_91", [" been shown to interact in a yeast two-hybrid assay, as well as in transient assays in plant cells (Hobo et\u00a0al., 1999).\nThe two remaining cloned ABI loci, ABI1 and  [CLS] ABI2, were initially identified by dominant negative mutations resulting in decreased sensitivity to ABA [CLS]  (Gosti et\u00a0al., 1999; Koornneef et\u00a0al., 1984). These loci encode highly homologous members of the PP2C family of ser/thr protein phosphatases, and it has been suggested that they might act"]]
["seedev_dev_92", [" Action in a common pathway was also suggested by genetic studies showing that digenic mutants combining the leaky abi3-1 alleles with severe mutations in either ABI4 or ABI5 produced  [CLS] seeds that were only slightly more resistant to ABA [CLS]  than their monogenic parents (Finkelstein, 1994). Recent studies show extensive cross-regulation of expression among ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5 (S\u00f6derman et\u00a0al., 2000). Furthermore, ectopic expression of either ABI3 or ABI4"]]
["seedev_dev_93", [" transactivation (Vasil et\u00a0al., 1995). These studies suggest that VP1 activates transcription through multiple cis-acting sequences, only some of which are ABREs. It was subsequently shown that both VP1 and  [CLS] EmBP1, an Em1a [CLS] -binding bZIP protein, specifically interact with GF14, a 14-3-3 protein which may provide a structural link between these transcription factors (Schultz et\u00a0al., 1998). Although ABI5 is similar to EmBP1 in"]]
["seedev_dev_94", [" the Em1a and Em1b elements, although required for ABA regulation and consequently designated ABREs, are sufficient but not necessary for VP1 transactivation (Vasil et\u00a0al., 1995). These studies suggest that  [CLS] VP1 activates transcription through multiple cis-acting sequences [CLS] , only some of which are ABREs. It was subsequently shown that both VP1 and EmBP1, an Em1a-binding bZIP protein, specifically interact with GF14, a 14-3-3 protein which may provide", " the Em1a and Em1b elements, although required for ABA regulation and consequently designated ABREs, are sufficient but not necessary for VP1 transactivation (Vasil et\u00a0al., 1995). These studies suggest that  [CLS] VP1 activates transcription through multiple cis-acting sequences, only some of which are ABREs [CLS] . It was subsequently shown that both VP1 and EmBP1, an Em1a-binding bZIP protein, specifically interact with GF14, a 14-3-3 protein which may provide a structural link between these transcription"]]
["seedev_dev_95", [" Giraudat, 1998). However, in the absence of genetic tests of function the roles of most of these components remain speculative.\nThree of the ABA insensitive loci, ABI3, ABI4 and  [CLS] ABI5, encode transcription factors of the B3-, AP2- and bZIP-domain families [CLS] , respectively, and regulate overlapping subsets of seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible genes (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998; Giraudat et\u00a0al., 1992). Two of these, ABI4 and ABI5, contain presumed DNA-binding"]]
["seedev_dev_96", [" response (Leung and Giraudat, 1998). However, in the absence of genetic tests of function the roles of most of these components remain speculative.\nThree of the ABA insensitive loci,  [CLS] ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5, encode transcription factors of the B3-, AP2- and bZIP-domain families [CLS] , respectively, and regulate overlapping subsets of seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible genes (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998; Giraudat et\u00a0al., 1992). Two of these, ABI4 and ABI5, contain presumed DNA-binding"]]
["seedev_dev_97", [" been shown to interact in a yeast two-hybrid assay, as well as in transient assays in plant cells (Hobo et\u00a0al., 1999).\nThe two remaining cloned ABI loci, ABI1 and  [CLS] ABI2, were initially identified by dominant negative mutations resulting in decreased sensitivity to ABA (Gosti et\u00a0al., 1999; Koornneef et\u00a0al., 1984). These loci encode highly homologous members of the PP2C family of ser/thr protein phosphatases [CLS] , and it has been suggested that they might act on overlapping subsets of substrates (Leung et\u00a0al., 1997). However, none of their substrates has been identified to date. Both the"]]
["seedev_dev_98", [" (Leung and Giraudat, 1998). However, in the absence of genetic tests of function the roles of most of these components remain speculative.\nThree of the ABA insensitive loci, ABI3,  [CLS] ABI4 and ABI5, encode transcription factors of the B3-, AP2- and bZIP-domain families [CLS] , respectively, and regulate overlapping subsets of seed-specific and/or ABA-inducible genes (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998; Giraudat et\u00a0al., 1992). Two of these, ABI4 and ABI5, contain presumed DNA-binding"]]
["seedev_dev_99", [" respectively) have been shown to interact in a yeast two-hybrid assay, as well as in transient assays in plant cells (Hobo et\u00a0al., 1999).\nThe two remaining cloned ABI loci,  [CLS] ABI1 and ABI2, were initially identified by dominant negative mutations resulting in decreased sensitivity to ABA (Gosti et\u00a0al., 1999; Koornneef et\u00a0al., 1984). These loci encode highly homologous members of the PP2C family of ser/thr protein phosphatases [CLS] , and it has been suggested that they might act on overlapping subsets of substrates (Leung et\u00a0al., 1997). However, none of their substrates has been identified to date. Both the"]]
["seedev_dev_100", [" seed maturation, onset of seed dormancy, and adaptation to assorted environmental stresses such as drought and salinity (Leung and Giraudat, 1998). Genetic studies have identified many loci required for  [CLS] wild-type ABA response; the best characterized are the ABA insensitive (ABI) and enhanced response to ABA (ERA) genes of Arabidopsis and the VP1 [CLS]  genes of maize and other cereals (Holdsworth et\u00a0al., 1999). Many additional presumed ABA-signaling components have been identified biochemically, based on binding to cis-acting regulatory elements such as ABREs (ABA-response"]]
["seedev_dev_101", [" seed maturation, onset of seed dormancy, and adaptation to assorted environmental stresses such as drought and salinity (Leung and Giraudat, 1998). Genetic studies have identified many loci required for  [CLS] wild-type ABA response; the best characterized are the ABA insensitive (ABI) and enhanced response to ABA (ERA [CLS] ) genes of Arabidopsis and the VP1 genes of maize and other cereals (Holdsworth et\u00a0al., 1999). Many additional presumed ABA-signaling components have been identified biochemically, based on binding to cis-acting"]]
["seedev_dev_102", [" environmental stresses such as drought and salinity (Leung and Giraudat, 1998). Genetic studies have identified many loci required for wild-type ABA response; the best characterized are the ABA insensitive ( [CLS] ABI) and enhanced response to ABA (ERA) genes of Arabidopsis [CLS]  and the VP1 genes of maize and other cereals (Holdsworth et\u00a0al., 1999). Many additional presumed ABA-signaling components have been identified biochemically, based on binding to cis-acting regulatory elements such"]]
["seedev_dev_103", [" seed maturation, onset of seed dormancy, and adaptation to assorted environmental stresses such as drought and salinity (Leung and Giraudat, 1998). Genetic studies have identified many loci required for  [CLS] wild-type ABA response [CLS] ; the best characterized are the ABA insensitive (ABI) and enhanced response to ABA (ERA) genes of Arabidopsis and the VP1 genes of maize and other cereals (Holdsworth et\u00a0al., 1999).", " maturation, onset of seed dormancy, and adaptation to assorted environmental stresses such as drought and salinity (Leung and Giraudat, 1998). Genetic studies have identified many loci required for wild-type  [CLS] ABA response; the best characterized are the ABA insensitive (ABI) and enhanced response to ABA (ERA) genes of Arabidopsis [CLS]  and the VP1 genes of maize and other cereals (Holdsworth et\u00a0al., 1999). Many additional presumed ABA-signaling components have been identified biochemically, based on binding to cis-acting regulatory elements such"]]
["seedev_dev_104", [" were only slightly more resistant to ABA than their monogenic parents (Finkelstein, 1994). Recent studies show extensive cross-regulation of expression among ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5 (S\u00f6derman et\u00a0al., 2000). Furthermore,  [CLS] ectopic expression of either ABI3 or ABI4 results in ABA hypersensitivity of vegetative tissues which is partly dependent on increased ABI5 [CLS]  expression (Parcy et\u00a0al., 1994; S\u00f6derman et\u00a0al., 2000). Taken together, these results suggest that these three transcription factors participate in combinatorial control of gene expression, possibly by forming a regulatory", " were only slightly more resistant to ABA than their monogenic parents (Finkelstein, 1994). Recent studies show extensive cross-regulation of expression among ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5 (S\u00f6derman et\u00a0al., 2000). Furthermore,  [CLS] ectopic expression of either ABI3 or ABI4 results in ABA hypersensitivity of vegetative tissues which is partly dependent on increased ABI5 [CLS]  expression (Parcy et\u00a0al., 1994; S\u00f6derman et\u00a0al., 2000). Taken together, these results suggest that these three transcription factors participate in combinatorial control of gene expression, possibly by forming a regulatory"]]
["seedev_dev_105", [" 1994). Recent studies show extensive cross-regulation of expression among ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5 (S\u00f6derman et\u00a0al., 2000). Furthermore, ectopic expression of either ABI3 or ABI4 results in ABA hypersensitivity of  [CLS] vegetative tissues which is partly dependent on increased ABI5 [CLS]  expression (Parcy et\u00a0al., 1994; S\u00f6derman et\u00a0al., 2000). Taken together, these results suggest that these three transcription factors participate in combinatorial control of gene expression, possibly by forming a regulatory"]]
["seedev_dev_106", [" ABI5 (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998; Parcy et\u00a0al., 1994). Action in a common pathway was also suggested by genetic studies showing that digenic mutants combining the leaky  [CLS] abi3-1 alleles with severe mutations in either ABI4 or ABI5 produced seeds that were only slightly more resistant to ABA [CLS]  than their monogenic parents (Finkelstein, 1994). Recent studies show extensive cross-regulation of expression among ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5 (S\u00f6derman et\u00a0al., 2000). Furthermore, ectopic expression of either ABI3 or ABI4"]]
["seedev_dev_107", [" Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998), consistent with the possibility that either might be a substrate for the ABI PP2Cs. Recently, two ABI5-related transcription factors, AREB1 and AREB2, were shown to promote  [CLS] ABA-activation of target gene expression (Uno et\u00a0al., 2000). Although this activation was repressed either by protein kinase inhibitor treatment of wild-type [CLS]  cells or by the dominant negative abi1-1 mutation, it is not known whether this reflects a direct or indirect effect on the phosphorylation status of these transcription factors.\nOur"]]
["seedev_dev_108", [" were only slightly more resistant to ABA than their monogenic parents (Finkelstein, 1994). Recent studies show extensive cross-regulation of expression among ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5 (S\u00f6derman et\u00a0al., 2000). Furthermore,  [CLS] ectopic expression of either ABI3 or ABI4 results in ABA hypersensitivity [CLS]  of vegetative tissues which is partly dependent on increased ABI5 expression (Parcy et\u00a0al., 1994; S\u00f6derman et\u00a0al., 2000). Taken together, these results suggest that these three transcription factors participate in"]]
["seedev_dev_109", [" ABI5 (Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000; Finkelstein et\u00a0al., 1998; Parcy et\u00a0al., 1994). Action in a common pathway was also suggested by genetic studies showing that digenic mutants combining the leaky  [CLS] abi3-1 alleles with severe mutations in either ABI4 or ABI5 produced seeds that were only slightly more resistant to ABA [CLS]  than their monogenic parents (Finkelstein, 1994). Recent studies show extensive cross-regulation of expression among ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5 (S\u00f6derman et\u00a0al., 2000). Furthermore, ectopic expression of either ABI3 or ABI4"]]
["seedev_dev_110", [" were only slightly more resistant to ABA than their monogenic parents (Finkelstein, 1994). Recent studies show extensive cross-regulation of expression among ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5 (S\u00f6derman et\u00a0al., 2000). Furthermore,  [CLS] ectopic expression of either ABI3 or ABI4 results in ABA hypersensitivity [CLS]  of vegetative tissues which is partly dependent on increased ABI5 expression (Parcy et\u00a0al., 1994; S\u00f6derman et\u00a0al., 2000). Taken together, these results suggest that these three transcription factors participate in"]]
["seedev_dev_111", [" monogenic parents (Finkelstein, 1994). Recent studies show extensive cross-regulation of expression among ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5 (S\u00f6derman et\u00a0al., 2000). Furthermore, ectopic expression of either ABI3 or ABI4 results in  [CLS] ABA hypersensitivity of vegetative tissues [CLS]  which is partly dependent on increased ABI5 expression (Parcy et\u00a0al., 1994; S\u00f6derman et\u00a0al., 2000). Taken together, these results suggest that these three transcription factors participate in combinatorial control of"]]
["seedev_dev_112", [" [CLS] LEC genes serve as central\nregulators of embryo and seed development [CLS] . This prediction was\nconfirmed by showing that LEC1 and FUS3 encode\nputative transcription factors that regulate critical embryonic\nprocesses (12, 19, 20). Here we present evidence suggesting that\nLEC2", " [CLS] LEC genes serve as central\nregulators of embryo and seed development [CLS] . This prediction was\nconfirmed by showing that LEC1 and FUS3 encode\nputative transcription factors that regulate critical embryonic\nprocesses (12, 19, 20). Here we present evidence suggesting that\nLEC2", " thought to share similar or overlapping functions with LEC1, including the specification or cotyledon identity and the maintenance of maturation ([2],\n[18]\u00a0and\u00a0[29]). Although nothing has been reported about how  [CLS] LEC\nclass genes act at the molecular level, their involvement in many\ndiverse aspects of embryogenesis [CLS]  suggests that these genes serve as\nregulators of higher plant embryonic processes.Figure 1.\u00a0Pleiotropic Effects of the lec1 Mutation on Embryo DevelopmentMajor differences between wild-type and lec1\nmutant embryos are"]]
["seedev_dev_113", [" development. This prediction was\nconfirmed by showing that LEC1 and FUS3 encode\nputative transcription factors that regulate critical embryonic\nprocesses (12, 19, 20). Here we present evidence suggesting that\n [CLS] LEC2 likely encodes a transcriptional regulator with a\nsignificant role in embryogenesis [CLS] .\n", " seed maturation genes, ASIL1 (ARABIDOPSIS 6B-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1-LIKE 1) [69] and PICKLE (PKL) [70], were modestly expressed and exhibited a stable expression pattern throughout seed\nmaturation (Figure 6C). Surprisingly,  [CLS] LEC2, a TF gene known to regulate oil accumulation in leaves and somatic embryogenesis [CLS] \n[10,14,16], was barely detectable in these developing seeds. Although this result requires verification\nwith other molecular methods, it was previously reported that LEC2 might be only expressed during early"]]
["seedev_dev_114", [" to forming a protective layer around the embryo, can play roles in such processes as seed\ndispersal and germination. One adaptation believed to act in these processes is the  [CLS] production of mucilage in the epidermal\ncells of the seed coat [CLS] . This specialization, known as myxospermy, is found in many families, including the Brassicaceae, Solanaceae,\nLinaceae, and Plantaginaceae (Grubert, 1981; Boesewinkel and Bouman, 1995). Seed imbibition in these plants leads"]]
["seedev_dev_115", [" [CLS] mature seed coat, in addition to forming a protective layer around the embryo, can play roles in such processes as seed\ndispersal [CLS]  and germination. One adaptation believed to act in these processes is the production of mucilage in the epidermal\ncells of the seed coat. This specialization, known as myxospermy, is", " [CLS] mature seed coat, in addition to forming a protective layer around the embryo, can play roles in such processes as seed\ndispersal and germination [CLS] . One adaptation believed to act in these processes is the production of mucilage in the epidermal\ncells of the seed coat. This specialization, known as myxospermy, is found in"]]
["seedev_dev_116", [" [CLS] MUM4 during Seed Coat Secretory Cell Differentiation by AP2, TTG1 [CLS] , and GL2\nMUM4 transcript increases in differentiating siliques at the time of mucilage production. Two lines of evidence suggest that this\nup-regulation occurs in the seed coat epidermis to", " framework for mucilage secretory cell differentiation in which there are at least two\npathways controlling mucilage biosynthesis in the seed coat. In one of these pathways, it appears that  [CLS] TTG1 and GL2 control\nthe transcription of MUM4 [CLS]  (Fig. 8). In other epidermal systems, such as trichomes and root hairs, TTG1 has been shown to interact with a tissue-specific MYB\nprotein through the bHLH protein GLABRA3 (Payne", " coat. In one of these pathways, it appears that TTG1 and GL2 control\nthe transcription of MUM4 (Fig. 8). In other epidermal systems, such as trichomes and root hairs,  [CLS] TTG1 has been shown to interact with a tissue-specific MYB\nprotein through the bHLH protein GLABRA3 (Payne et al., 2000; Schiefelbein, 2003) to activate GL2 [CLS] . Therefore, we favor a model in which a seed coat-specific complex of TTG1-bHLH-MYB causes activation of GL2 and the subsequent up-regulation of MUM4 during mucilage production (Fig. 8). Recent"]]
["seedev_dev_117", [" that this\nup-regulation occurs in the seed coat epidermis to support mucilage biosynthesis. First, the only obvious phenotypic defect\nin mum4 plants occurs in the seed coat epidermis. Second,  [CLS] MUM4 expression is severely attenuated in siliques [CLS]  of ap2 mutants that fail to differentiate the outer two layers of the seed coat. Such a specific up-regulation of a putative NDP-l-Rha synthase may be required to provide"]]
["seedev_dev_118", [" [CLS] MUM4 during Seed Coat Secretory Cell Differentiation by AP2 [CLS] , TTG1, and GL2\nMUM4 transcript increases in differentiating siliques at the time of mucilage production. Two lines of evidence suggest that this\nup-regulation occurs in the seed coat epidermis", " leaves and stems compared with the WT. mRNA accumulation of these genes was examined in ap2-7, and similar results were obtained (data not shown). These results may suggest that  [CLS] AP2 represses the expression of ERF genes such as AtEBP, AtERF1 and the AP2 [CLS]  gene itself.\n", " In ap2-5, the AtEBP mRNA level was increased in flowers, leaves and stems. The AP2 mRNA level of ap2-5 was also increased, especially in flowers and leaves, suggesting that  [CLS] AP2 activity also suppresses its own AP2 [CLS]  gene expression. The expression pattern of AtERF1 was similar to that of AtEBP: the AtERF1 mRNA level of ap2-5 increased in flowers, leaves and stems compared with the WT.", " leaves and stems compared with the WT. mRNA accumulation of these genes was examined in ap2-7, and similar results were obtained (data not shown). These results may suggest that  [CLS] AP2 represses the expression of ERF genes such as AtEBP [CLS] , AtERF1 and the AP2 gene itself.\n", " [CLS] AtEBP is regulated by AP2 [CLS]  activity (Okamuro et al., 1997). This observation lead to the investigation of the transcriptional regulation of AP2/EREBP domain-containing genes in the\ncurrent study. To investigate the relationships in the", " leaves and stems compared with the WT. mRNA accumulation of these genes was examined in ap2-7, and similar results were obtained (data not shown). These results may suggest that  [CLS] AP2 represses the expression of ERF genes such as AtEBP, AtERF1 [CLS]  and the AP2 gene itself.\n"]]
["seedev_dev_119", [" so, the amount of this enzyme must be the limiting factor in Rha biosynthesis and the amount of Rha a limiting factor in\nRGI biosynthesis.\nOur data indicate that  [CLS] MUM4 transcription is decreased in ttg1 and gl2 mutants but is essentially wild type in ttg2 and myb61 [CLS]  mutants (Fig. 7A). This result suggests a regulatory framework for mucilage secretory cell differentiation in which there are at least two\npathways controlling mucilage biosynthesis in the seed coat."]]
["seedev_dev_120", [" so, the amount of this enzyme must be the limiting factor in Rha biosynthesis and the amount of Rha a limiting factor in\nRGI biosynthesis.\nOur data indicate that  [CLS] MUM4 transcription is decreased in ttg1 and gl2 mutants but is essentially wild type in ttg2 [CLS]  and myb61 mutants (Fig. 7A). This result suggests a regulatory framework for mucilage secretory cell differentiation in which there are at least two\npathways controlling mucilage biosynthesis in the"]]
["seedev_dev_121", [" tissue-specific MYB\nprotein through the bHLH protein GLABRA3 (Payne et al., 2000; Schiefelbein, 2003) to activate GL2. Therefore, we favor a model in which a seed coat-specific complex of  [CLS] TTG1-bHLH-MYB causes activation of GL2 [CLS]  and the subsequent up-regulation of MUM4 during mucilage production (Fig. 8). Recent results suggest that EGL3 (ENHANCER OF GLABRA3) and/or TT8 (TRANSPARENT TESTA8) are the bHLH proteins acting with"]]
["seedev_dev_122", [" so, the amount of this enzyme must be the limiting factor in Rha biosynthesis and the amount of Rha a limiting factor in\nRGI biosynthesis.\nOur data indicate that  [CLS] MUM4 transcription is decreased in ttg1 and gl2 [CLS]  mutants but is essentially wild type in ttg2 and myb61 mutants (Fig. 7A). This result suggests a regulatory framework for mucilage secretory cell differentiation in which there are at"]]
["seedev_dev_123", [" so, the amount of this enzyme must be the limiting factor in Rha biosynthesis and the amount of Rha a limiting factor in\nRGI biosynthesis.\nOur data indicate that  [CLS] MUM4 transcription is decreased in ttg1 and gl2 mutants but is essentially wild type [CLS]  in ttg2 and myb61 mutants (Fig. 7A). This result suggests a regulatory framework for mucilage secretory cell differentiation in which there are at least two\npathways controlling mucilage biosynthesis"]]
["seedev_dev_124", [" [CLS] MUM4 during Seed Coat Secretory Cell Differentiation by AP2, TTG1, and GL2 [CLS] \nMUM4 transcript increases in differentiating siliques at the time of mucilage production. Two lines of evidence suggest that this\nup-regulation occurs in the seed coat epidermis to support mucilage", " mucilage secretory cell differentiation in which there are at least two\npathways controlling mucilage biosynthesis in the seed coat. In one of these pathways, it appears that TTG1 and  [CLS] GL2 control\nthe transcription of MUM4 [CLS]  (Fig. 8). In other epidermal systems, such as trichomes and root hairs, TTG1 has been shown to interact with a tissue-specific MYB\nprotein through the bHLH protein GLABRA3 (Payne"]]
["seedev_dev_125", [" so, the amount of this enzyme must be the limiting factor in Rha biosynthesis and the amount of Rha a limiting factor in\nRGI biosynthesis.\nOur data indicate that  [CLS] MUM4 transcription is decreased in ttg1 [CLS]  and gl2 mutants but is essentially wild type in ttg2 and myb61 mutants (Fig. 7A). This result suggests a regulatory framework for mucilage secretory cell differentiation in which there"]]
["seedev_dev_126", [" the bHLH protein GLABRA3 (Payne et al., 2000; Schiefelbein, 2003) to activate GL2. Therefore, we favor a model in which a seed coat-specific complex of TTG1-bHLH-MYB causes activation of  [CLS] GL2 and the subsequent up-regulation of MUM4 [CLS]  during mucilage production (Fig. 8). Recent results suggest that EGL3 (ENHANCER OF GLABRA3) and/or TT8 (TRANSPARENT TESTA8) are the bHLH proteins acting with\nTTG1 in the seed coat (Zhang"]]
["seedev_dev_127", [" coat. In one of these pathways, it appears that TTG1 and GL2 control\nthe transcription of MUM4 (Fig. 8). In other epidermal systems, such as trichomes and root hairs,  [CLS] TTG1 has been shown to interact with a tissue-specific MYB [CLS] \nprotein through the bHLH protein GLABRA3 (Payne et al., 2000; Schiefelbein, 2003) to activate GL2. Therefore, we favor a model in which a seed coat-specific complex of TTG1-bHLH-MYB causes"]]
["seedev_dev_128", [" seed coat-specific complex of TTG1-bHLH-MYB causes activation of GL2 and the subsequent up-regulation of MUM4 during mucilage production (Fig. 8). Recent results suggest that EGL3 (ENHANCER OF GLABRA3) and/or  [CLS] TT8 (TRANSPARENT TESTA8) are the bHLH proteins acting with\nTTG1 [CLS]  in the seed coat (Zhang et al., 2003).\n"]]
["seedev_dev_129", [" a model in which a seed coat-specific complex of TTG1-bHLH-MYB causes activation of GL2 and the subsequent up-regulation of MUM4 during mucilage production (Fig. 8). Recent results suggest that  [CLS] EGL3 (ENHANCER OF GLABRA3) and/or TT8 (TRANSPARENT TESTA8) are the bHLH proteins acting with\nTTG1 [CLS]  in the seed coat (Zhang et al., 2003).\n"]]
["seedev_dev_130", [" TTG1 and GL2 control\nthe transcription of MUM4 (Fig. 8). In other epidermal systems, such as trichomes and root hairs, TTG1 has been shown to interact with a tissue-specific  [CLS] MYB\nprotein through the bHLH protein GLABRA3 [CLS]  (Payne et al., 2000; Schiefelbein, 2003) to activate GL2. Therefore, we favor a model in which a seed coat-specific complex of TTG1-bHLH-MYB causes activation of GL2 and the subsequent"]]
["seedev_dev_131", [" coat. In one of these pathways, it appears that TTG1 and GL2 control\nthe transcription of MUM4 (Fig. 8). In other epidermal systems, such as trichomes and root hairs,  [CLS] TTG1 has been shown to interact with a tissue-specific MYB\nprotein through the bHLH protein GLABRA3 [CLS]  (Payne et al., 2000; Schiefelbein, 2003) to activate GL2. Therefore, we favor a model in which a seed coat-specific complex of TTG1-bHLH-MYB causes activation of GL2 and the subsequent"]]
["seedev_dev_132", [" MUM4 expression is severely attenuated in siliques of ap2 mutants that fail to differentiate the outer two layers of the seed coat. Such a specific up-regulation of a putative  [CLS] NDP-l-Rha synthase may be required to provide extra Rha for the production of the large quantity of RGI required for mucilage synthesis.\nIf so, the amount of this enzyme must be the limiting factor in Rha biosynthesis [CLS]  and the amount of Rha a limiting factor in\nRGI biosynthesis.\nOur data indicate that MUM4 transcription is decreased in ttg1 and gl2 mutants but is essentially wild type", " MUM4 expression is severely attenuated in siliques of ap2 mutants that fail to differentiate the outer two layers of the seed coat. Such a specific up-regulation of a putative  [CLS] NDP-l-Rha synthase may be required to provide extra Rha for the production of the large quantity of RGI [CLS]  required for mucilage synthesis.\nIf so, the amount of this enzyme must be the limiting factor in Rha biosynthesis and the amount of Rha a limiting factor in\nRGI"]]
["seedev_dev_133", [" fail to differentiate the outer two layers of the seed coat. Such a specific up-regulation of a putative NDP-l-Rha synthase may be required to provide extra Rha for the  [CLS] production of the large quantity of RGI required for mucilage synthesis [CLS] .\nIf so, the amount of this enzyme must be the limiting factor in Rha biosynthesis and the amount of Rha a limiting factor in\nRGI biosynthesis.\nOur data indicate"]]
["seedev_dev_134", [" provide extra Rha for the production of the large quantity of RGI required for mucilage synthesis.\nIf so, the amount of this enzyme must be the limiting factor in  [CLS] Rha biosynthesis and the amount of Rha a limiting factor in\nRGI biosynthesis [CLS] .\nOur data indicate that MUM4 transcription is decreased in ttg1 and gl2 mutants but is essentially wild type in ttg2 and myb61 mutants (Fig. 7A). This result suggests a"]]
["seedev_dev_135", [" to interact with a tissue-specific MYB\nprotein through the bHLH protein GLABRA3 (Payne et al., 2000; Schiefelbein, 2003) to activate GL2. Therefore, we favor a model in which a  [CLS] seed coat-specific complex of TTG1-bHLH-MYB causes activation of GL2 and the subsequent up-regulation of MUM4 during mucilage production [CLS]  (Fig. 8). Recent results suggest that EGL3 (ENHANCER OF GLABRA3) and/or TT8 (TRANSPARENT TESTA8) are the bHLH proteins acting with\nTTG1 in the seed coat (Zhang et al., 2003)."]]
["seedev_dev_136", [" epidermis to support mucilage biosynthesis. First, the only obvious phenotypic defect\nin mum4 plants occurs in the seed coat epidermis. Second, MUM4 expression is severely attenuated in siliques of  [CLS] ap2 mutants that fail to differentiate the outer two layers of the seed coat [CLS] . Such a specific up-regulation of a putative NDP-l-Rha synthase may be required to provide extra Rha for the production of the large quantity of RGI required for mucilage synthesis."]]
["seedev_dev_137", [" wild type in ttg2 and myb61 mutants (Fig. 7A). This result suggests a regulatory framework for mucilage secretory cell differentiation in which there are at least two\npathways controlling  [CLS] mucilage biosynthesis in the seed coat [CLS] . In one of these pathways, it appears that TTG1 and GL2 control\nthe transcription of MUM4 (Fig. 8). In other epidermal systems, such as trichomes and root hairs, TTG1"]]
["seedev_dev_138", [" [CLS] MUM4 transcript increases in differentiating siliques [CLS]  at the time of mucilage production. Two lines of evidence suggest that this\nup-regulation occurs in the seed coat epidermis to support mucilage biosynthesis. First, the only obvious phenotypic"]]
["seedev_dev_139", [" Differentiation by AP2, TTG1, and GL2\nMUM4 transcript increases in differentiating siliques at the time of mucilage production. Two lines of evidence suggest that this\nup-regulation occurs in the  [CLS] seed coat epidermis to support mucilage biosynthesis [CLS] . First, the only obvious phenotypic defect\nin mum4 plants occurs in the seed coat epidermis. Second, MUM4 expression is severely attenuated in siliques of ap2 mutants that fail to"]]
["seedev_dev_140", [" to interact with a tissue-specific MYB\nprotein through the bHLH protein GLABRA3 (Payne et al., 2000; Schiefelbein, 2003) to activate GL2. Therefore, we favor a model in which a  [CLS] seed coat-specific complex of TTG1-bHLH-MYB [CLS]  causes activation of GL2 and the subsequent up-regulation of MUM4 during mucilage production (Fig. 8). Recent results suggest that EGL3 (ENHANCER OF GLABRA3) and/or TT8 (TRANSPARENT TESTA8) are the"]]
["seedev_dev_141", [" seed coat-specific complex of TTG1-bHLH-MYB causes activation of GL2 and the subsequent up-regulation of MUM4 during mucilage production (Fig. 8). Recent results suggest that EGL3 (ENHANCER OF GLABRA3) and/or  [CLS] TT8 (TRANSPARENT TESTA8 [CLS] ) are the bHLH proteins acting with\nTTG1 in the seed coat (Zhang et al., 2003).\n"]]
["seedev_dev_142", [" a model in which a seed coat-specific complex of TTG1-bHLH-MYB causes activation of GL2 and the subsequent up-regulation of MUM4 during mucilage production (Fig. 8). Recent results suggest that  [CLS] EGL3 (ENHANCER OF GLABRA3 [CLS] ) and/or TT8 (TRANSPARENT TESTA8) are the bHLH proteins acting with\nTTG1 in the seed coat (Zhang et al., 2003).\n"]]
["seedev_dev_143", [" seed coat-specific complex of TTG1-bHLH-MYB causes activation of GL2 and the subsequent up-regulation of MUM4 during mucilage production (Fig. 8). Recent results suggest that EGL3 (ENHANCER OF GLABRA3) and/or  [CLS] TT8 (TRANSPARENT TESTA8) are the bHLH proteins [CLS]  acting with\nTTG1 in the seed coat (Zhang et al., 2003).\n"]]
["seedev_dev_144", ["\nthe transcription of MUM4 (Fig. 8). In other epidermal systems, such as trichomes and root hairs, TTG1 has been shown to interact with a tissue-specific MYB\nprotein through the  [CLS] bHLH protein GLABRA3 [CLS]  (Payne et al., 2000; Schiefelbein, 2003) to activate GL2. Therefore, we favor a model in which a seed coat-specific complex of TTG1-bHLH-MYB causes activation of GL2 and the subsequent"]]
["seedev_dev_145", [" a model in which a seed coat-specific complex of TTG1-bHLH-MYB causes activation of GL2 and the subsequent up-regulation of MUM4 during mucilage production (Fig. 8). Recent results suggest that  [CLS] EGL3 (ENHANCER OF GLABRA3) and/or TT8 (TRANSPARENT TESTA8) are the bHLH proteins [CLS]  acting with\nTTG1 in the seed coat (Zhang et al., 2003).\n"]]
["seedev_dev_146", [" seed coat-specific complex of TTG1-bHLH-MYB causes activation of GL2 and the subsequent up-regulation of MUM4 during mucilage production (Fig. 8). Recent results suggest that EGL3 (ENHANCER OF GLABRA3) and/or  [CLS] TT8 (TRANSPARENT TESTA8) are the bHLH proteins acting with\nTTG1 in the seed coat [CLS]  (Zhang et al., 2003).\n"]]
["seedev_dev_147", [" a model in which a seed coat-specific complex of TTG1-bHLH-MYB causes activation of GL2 and the subsequent up-regulation of MUM4 during mucilage production (Fig. 8). Recent results suggest that  [CLS] EGL3 (ENHANCER OF GLABRA3) and/or TT8 (TRANSPARENT TESTA8) are the bHLH proteins acting with\nTTG1 in the seed coat [CLS]  (Zhang et al., 2003).\n"]]
["seedev_dev_148", [" and the subsequent up-regulation of MUM4 during mucilage production (Fig. 8). Recent results suggest that EGL3 (ENHANCER OF GLABRA3) and/or TT8 (TRANSPARENT TESTA8) are the bHLH proteins acting with\n [CLS] TTG1 in the seed coat [CLS]  (Zhang et al., 2003).\n"]]
["seedev_dev_149", [" [CLS] Seed Coat Secretory Cell Differentiation by AP2, TTG1 [CLS] , and GL2\nMUM4 transcript increases in differentiating siliques at the time of mucilage production. Two lines of evidence suggest that this\nup-regulation occurs in the seed coat epidermis to"]]
["seedev_dev_150", [" [CLS] Seed Coat Secretory Cell Differentiation by AP2 [CLS] , TTG1, and GL2\nMUM4 transcript increases in differentiating siliques at the time of mucilage production. Two lines of evidence suggest that this\nup-regulation occurs in the seed coat epidermis"]]
["seedev_dev_151", [" tissue-specific MYB\nprotein through the bHLH protein GLABRA3 (Payne et al., 2000; Schiefelbein, 2003) to activate GL2. Therefore, we favor a model in which a seed coat-specific complex of  [CLS] TTG1-bHLH-MYB causes activation of GL2 and the subsequent up-regulation of MUM4 during mucilage production [CLS]  (Fig. 8). Recent results suggest that EGL3 (ENHANCER OF GLABRA3) and/or TT8 (TRANSPARENT TESTA8) are the bHLH proteins acting with\nTTG1 in the seed coat (Zhang et al., 2003)."]]
["seedev_dev_152", [" [CLS] Seed Coat Secretory Cell Differentiation by AP2, TTG1, and GL2 [CLS] \nMUM4 transcript increases in differentiating siliques at the time of mucilage production. Two lines of evidence suggest that this\nup-regulation occurs in the seed coat epidermis to support mucilage"]]
["seedev_dev_153", [" that this\nup-regulation occurs in the seed coat epidermis to support mucilage biosynthesis. First, the only obvious phenotypic defect\nin mum4 plants occurs in the seed coat epidermis. Second,  [CLS] MUM4 expression is severely attenuated in siliques of ap2 [CLS]  mutants that fail to differentiate the outer two layers of the seed coat. Such a specific up-regulation of a putative NDP-l-Rha synthase may be required to provide extra Rha"]]
["seedev_dev_154", [" the bHLH protein GLABRA3 (Payne et al., 2000; Schiefelbein, 2003) to activate GL2. Therefore, we favor a model in which a seed coat-specific complex of TTG1-bHLH-MYB causes activation of  [CLS] GL2 and the subsequent up-regulation of MUM4 during mucilage production [CLS]  (Fig. 8). Recent results suggest that EGL3 (ENHANCER OF GLABRA3) and/or TT8 (TRANSPARENT TESTA8) are the bHLH proteins acting with\nTTG1 in the seed coat (Zhang et al., 2003).", " al., 2000; Schiefelbein, 2003) to activate GL2. Therefore, we favor a model in which a seed coat-specific complex of TTG1-bHLH-MYB causes activation of GL2 and the subsequent up-regulation of  [CLS] MUM4 during mucilage production [CLS]  (Fig. 8). Recent results suggest that EGL3 (ENHANCER OF GLABRA3) and/or TT8 (TRANSPARENT TESTA8) are the bHLH proteins acting with\nTTG1 in the seed coat (Zhang et al., 2003)."]]
["seedev_dev_155", [" [CLS] MUM4 during Seed Coat Secretory Cell Differentiation [CLS]  by AP2, TTG1, and GL2\nMUM4 transcript increases in differentiating siliques at the time of mucilage production. Two lines of evidence suggest that this\nup-regulation occurs in the seed"]]
["seedev_dev_156", [" cell morphogenesis but seem too simple to account for the apparent complexity of the shape of the cytoplasmic\ncolumn. An alternate but not mutually exclusive explanation is that the  [CLS] synthesis of mucilage may represent or lead to the\nproduction of an oligosaccharide signal [CLS]  that stimulates the cell to undergo morphogenesis (Dumville and Fry, 2000; Ridley et al., 2001). Determination of the exact processes involved would be facilitated by the isolation of mutants"]]
["seedev_dev_157", [" the apparent complexity of the shape of the cytoplasmic\ncolumn. An alternate but not mutually exclusive explanation is that the synthesis of mucilage may represent or lead to the\n [CLS] production of an oligosaccharide signal that stimulates the cell to undergo morphogenesis  [CLS] (Dumville and Fry, 2000; Ridley et al., 2001). Determination of the exact processes involved would be facilitated by the isolation of mutants affected specifically in\nthe shaping of the columella."]]
["seedev_dev_158", [" [CLS] defect in mucilage production is readily explained by the putative\nfunction of MUM4 as an NDP-l-Rha synthase, the connection with the columella [CLS]  shape change is less obvious. At least two hypotheses can explain the dependence\nof cell morphogenesis on mucilage synthesis. The formation of the apoplastic space and cytoplasmic column may"]]
["seedev_dev_159", [" with the columella shape change is less obvious. At least two hypotheses can explain the dependence\nof cell morphogenesis on mucilage synthesis. The formation of the apoplastic space and  [CLS] cytoplasmic column may be driven by\nthe pressure of accumulating mucilage [CLS]  in the extracytoplasmic space and/or the formation of an osmotic gradient between the\ncell and the hydrophilic pectin may lead to the loss of turgor and size reduction of", " synthase, the connection with the columella shape change is less obvious. At least two hypotheses can explain the dependence\nof cell morphogenesis on mucilage synthesis. The formation of the  [CLS] apoplastic space and cytoplasmic column may be driven by\nthe pressure of accumulating mucilage [CLS]  in the extracytoplasmic space and/or the formation of an osmotic gradient between the\ncell and the hydrophilic pectin may lead to the loss of turgor and size reduction of"]]
["seedev_dev_160", [" [CLS] mucilage production is readily explained by the putative\nfunction of MUM4 as an NDP-l-Rha synthase, the connection with the columella [CLS]  shape change is less obvious. At least two hypotheses can explain the dependence\nof cell morphogenesis on mucilage synthesis. The formation of the apoplastic space and cytoplasmic column may"]]
["seedev_dev_161", [" [CLS] defect in mucilage production is readily explained by the putative\nfunction of MUM4 [CLS]  as an NDP-l-Rha synthase, the connection with the columella shape change is less obvious. At least two hypotheses can explain the dependence\nof cell morphogenesis on mucilage synthesis. The"]]
["seedev_dev_162", [" by the putative\nfunction of MUM4 as an NDP-l-Rha synthase, the connection with the columella shape change is less obvious. At least two hypotheses can explain the dependence\nof  [CLS] cell morphogenesis on mucilage synthesis [CLS] . The formation of the apoplastic space and cytoplasmic column may be driven by\nthe pressure of accumulating mucilage in the extracytoplasmic space and/or the formation of an osmotic gradient"]]
["seedev_dev_163", [" [CLS] MUM4 as an NDP-l-Rha synthase [CLS] , the connection with the columella shape change is less obvious. At least two hypotheses can explain the dependence\nof cell morphogenesis on mucilage synthesis. The formation of the apoplastic"]]
["seedev_dev_164", [" expressed in the endosperm has been implicated to function in the control of seed\nmass (reviewed in refs. 21\u201323).\nIn this study, we focus on the role of Arabidopsis  [CLS] APETALA2 (AP2 [CLS] ) in controlling seed mass. AP2 encodes the founding member of a family of plant-specific transcription factors that contains an AP2/EREBP (ethylene responsive\nelement binding protein) domain, a conserved region"]]
["seedev_dev_165", [" study, we focus on the role of Arabidopsis APETALA2 (AP2) in controlling seed mass. AP2 encodes the founding member of a family of plant-specific transcription factors that contains an AP2/ [CLS] EREBP (ethylene responsive\nelement binding protein [CLS] ) domain, a conserved region of \u224860 aa involved in DNA binding (24\u201326). This transcription factor is involved in the specification of flower organ identity, establishment of flower meristem identity,"]]
["seedev_dev_166", [" in DNA binding (24\u201326). This transcription factor is involved in the specification of flower organ identity, establishment of flower meristem identity,\nand suppression of flower meristem indeterminancy (25, 27\u201331).  [CLS] AP2 is also required for ovule and seed coat development [CLS]  (24, 32, 33). Although the most conspicuous function of AP2 is in flower development, its transcripts are not restricted to flowers but are detected in leaves, stems, and seedlings", " meristem identity,\nand suppression of flower meristem indeterminancy (25, 27\u201331). AP2 is also required for ovule and seed coat development (24, 32, 33). Although the most conspicuous function of  [CLS] AP2 is in flower development [CLS] , its transcripts are not restricted to flowers but are detected in leaves, stems, and seedlings\nalso (24, 34), opening the possibility of a more global function for AP2. Here,", " in DNA binding (24\u201326). This transcription factor is involved in the specification of flower organ identity, establishment of flower meristem identity,\nand suppression of flower meristem indeterminancy (25, 27\u201331).  [CLS] AP2 is also required for ovule and seed coat development [CLS]  (24, 32, 33). Although the most conspicuous function of AP2 is in flower development, its transcripts are not restricted to flowers but are detected in leaves, stems, and seedlings"]]
["seedev_dev_167", [" mass.\nA critical factor in determining plant fitness is seed mass. Seed mass is negatively correlated with the number of seeds produced\nand positively correlated with seedling survival (1\u20135).  [CLS] Small-seeded plants are considered to be efficient colonizers because they produce large numbers of seeds [CLS] , whereas seedlings\nof large-seeded plants are thought to more effectively withstand resource restrictions and abiotic stresses. Moreover, seed\nmass can vary intraspecifically in response to environmental cues, although little"]]
["seedev_dev_168", [" implicated to function in the control of seed\nmass (reviewed in refs. 21\u201323).\nIn this study, we focus on the role of Arabidopsis APETALA2 (AP2) in controlling seed mass.  [CLS] AP2 encodes the founding member of a family of plant-specific transcription factors that contains an AP2/EREBP (ethylene responsive\nelement binding protein) domain, a conserved region of \u224860 aa involved in DNA binding (24\u201326). This transcription factor is involved in the specification of flower organ identity, establishment of flower meristem identity,\nand suppression of flower meristem indeterminancy [CLS]  (25, 27\u201331). AP2 is also required for ovule and seed coat development (24, 32, 33). Although the most conspicuous function of AP2 is in flower development, its transcripts are", " but are detected in leaves, stems, and seedlings\nalso (24, 34), opening the possibility of a more global function for AP2. Here, we identify a previously undescribed function for  [CLS] AP2 by showing that loss-of-function ap2 mutations cause increases in seed mass [CLS] .\n", " implicated to function in the control of seed\nmass (reviewed in refs. 21\u201323).\nIn this study, we focus on the role of Arabidopsis APETALA2 (AP2) in controlling seed mass.  [CLS] AP2 encodes the founding member of a family of plant-specific transcription factors that contains an AP2/EREBP (ethylene responsive\nelement binding protein) domain, a conserved region of \u224860 aa involved in DNA binding (24\u201326). This transcription factor is involved in the specification of flower organ identity [CLS] , establishment of flower meristem identity,\nand suppression of flower meristem indeterminancy (25, 27\u201331). AP2 is also required for ovule and seed coat development (24, 32, 33). Although the most", " implicated to function in the control of seed\nmass (reviewed in refs. 21\u201323).\nIn this study, we focus on the role of Arabidopsis APETALA2 (AP2) in controlling seed mass.  [CLS] AP2 encodes the founding member of a family of plant-specific transcription factors that contains an AP2/EREBP (ethylene responsive\nelement binding protein) domain, a conserved region of \u224860 aa involved in DNA binding (24\u201326). This transcription factor is involved in the specification of flower organ identity, establishment of flower meristem identity [CLS] ,\nand suppression of flower meristem indeterminancy (25, 27\u201331). AP2 is also required for ovule and seed coat development (24, 32, 33). Although the most conspicuous function of AP2 is"]]
["seedev_dev_169", [" Although seeds have been studied extensively, many aspects of seed development are not well understood, including\nthe mechanisms that underlie seed size or mass.\nA critical factor in determining  [CLS] plant fitness is seed mass [CLS] . Seed mass is negatively correlated with the number of seeds produced\nand positively correlated with seedling survival (1\u20135). Small-seeded plants are considered to be efficient colonizers because they produce"]]
["seedev_dev_170", [" factors that influence seed mass (14). A series of studies with fava bean suggest that the relative accumulation of hexose and sucrose during seed development\nplays roles in determining  [CLS] seed mass through changes in seed cell number and cell size [CLS]  (14\u201316).\nSeed mass is also influenced by parent-of-origin effects (17, 18). Interploidy crosses between diploid and polyploid plants produce offspring with a maternal or paternal genomic excess.\nSeeds from"]]
["seedev_dev_171", [" extensively, many aspects of seed development are not well understood, including\nthe mechanisms that underlie seed size or mass.\nA critical factor in determining plant fitness is seed mass.  [CLS] Seed mass is negatively correlated with the number of seeds produced\nand positively correlated with seedling survival [CLS]  (1\u20135). Small-seeded plants are considered to be efficient colonizers because they produce large numbers of seeds, whereas seedlings\nof large-seeded plants are thought to more effectively withstand resource restrictions", " extensively, many aspects of seed development are not well understood, including\nthe mechanisms that underlie seed size or mass.\nA critical factor in determining plant fitness is seed mass.  [CLS] Seed mass is negatively correlated with the number of seeds [CLS]  produced\nand positively correlated with seedling survival (1\u20135). Small-seeded plants are considered to be efficient colonizers because they produce large numbers of seeds, whereas seedlings\nof large-seeded plants are"]]
["seedev_dev_172", [" identified, other studies implicate enzymes involved\nin sugar metabolism as candidates for factors that influence seed mass (14). A series of studies with fava bean suggest that the relative  [CLS] accumulation of hexose and sucrose during seed development\nplays roles in determining seed mass [CLS]  through changes in seed cell number and cell size (14\u201316).\nSeed mass is also influenced by parent-of-origin effects (17, 18). Interploidy crosses between diploid and polyploid plants produce offspring", " identified, other studies implicate enzymes involved\nin sugar metabolism as candidates for factors that influence seed mass (14). A series of studies with fava bean suggest that the relative  [CLS] accumulation of hexose and sucrose during seed development\nplays roles in determining seed mass through changes in seed cell number [CLS]  and cell size (14\u201316).\nSeed mass is also influenced by parent-of-origin effects (17, 18). Interploidy crosses between diploid and polyploid plants produce offspring with a maternal or paternal genomic", " identified, other studies implicate enzymes involved\nin sugar metabolism as candidates for factors that influence seed mass (14). A series of studies with fava bean suggest that the relative  [CLS] accumulation of hexose and sucrose during seed development\nplays roles in determining seed mass through changes in seed cell number and cell size [CLS]  (14\u201316).\nSeed mass is also influenced by parent-of-origin effects (17, 18). Interploidy crosses between diploid and polyploid plants produce offspring with a maternal or paternal genomic excess.\nSeeds from"]]
["seedev_dev_173", [" identified, other studies implicate enzymes involved\nin sugar metabolism as candidates for factors that influence seed mass (14). A series of studies with fava bean suggest that the relative  [CLS] accumulation of hexose and sucrose during seed development\nplays roles in determining seed mass [CLS]  through changes in seed cell number and cell size (14\u201316).\nSeed mass is also influenced by parent-of-origin effects (17, 18). Interploidy crosses between diploid and polyploid plants produce offspring", " identified, other studies implicate enzymes involved\nin sugar metabolism as candidates for factors that influence seed mass (14). A series of studies with fava bean suggest that the relative  [CLS] accumulation of hexose and sucrose during seed development\nplays roles in determining seed mass through changes in seed cell number and cell size [CLS]  (14\u201316).\nSeed mass is also influenced by parent-of-origin effects (17, 18). Interploidy crosses between diploid and polyploid plants produce offspring with a maternal or paternal genomic excess.\nSeeds from"]]
["seedev_dev_174", [" factors that influence seed mass (14). A series of studies with fava bean suggest that the relative accumulation of hexose and sucrose during seed development\nplays roles in determining  [CLS] seed mass through changes in seed cell number [CLS]  and cell size (14\u201316).\nSeed mass is also influenced by parent-of-origin effects (17, 18). Interploidy crosses between diploid and polyploid plants produce offspring with a maternal or paternal genomic"]]
["seedev_dev_175", [" posits that the maternal plant will attempt to allocate resources\nequally among its progeny, whereas the paternal plant will try to maximize channeling of maternal resources to its progeny.\n [CLS] Imprinting of maternal and paternal alleles expressed in the endosperm has been implicated to function in the control of seed\nmass [CLS]  (reviewed in refs. 21\u201323).\nIn this study, we focus on the role of Arabidopsis APETALA2 (AP2) in controlling seed mass. AP2 encodes the founding member of a family of"]]
["seedev_dev_176", [" meristem identity,\nand suppression of flower meristem indeterminancy (25, 27\u201331). AP2 is also required for ovule and seed coat development (24, 32, 33). Although the most conspicuous function of  [CLS] AP2 is in flower development, its transcripts are not restricted to flowers but are detected in leaves, stems [CLS] , and seedlings\nalso (24, 34), opening the possibility of a more global function for AP2. Here, we identify a previously undescribed function for AP2 by showing that loss-of-function ap2", " meristem identity,\nand suppression of flower meristem indeterminancy (25, 27\u201331). AP2 is also required for ovule and seed coat development (24, 32, 33). Although the most conspicuous function of  [CLS] AP2 is in flower development, its transcripts are not restricted to flowers but are detected in leaves [CLS] , stems, and seedlings\nalso (24, 34), opening the possibility of a more global function for AP2. Here, we identify a previously undescribed function for AP2 by showing that loss-of-function", " meristem identity,\nand suppression of flower meristem indeterminancy (25, 27\u201331). AP2 is also required for ovule and seed coat development (24, 32, 33). Although the most conspicuous function of  [CLS] AP2 is in flower development, its transcripts are not restricted to flowers but are detected in leaves, stems, and seedlings [CLS] \nalso (24, 34), opening the possibility of a more global function for AP2. Here, we identify a previously undescribed function for AP2 by showing that loss-of-function ap2 mutations cause", " meristem identity,\nand suppression of flower meristem indeterminancy (25, 27\u201331). AP2 is also required for ovule and seed coat development (24, 32, 33). Although the most conspicuous function of  [CLS] AP2 is in flower development, its transcripts are not restricted to flowers [CLS]  but are detected in leaves, stems, and seedlings\nalso (24, 34), opening the possibility of a more global function for AP2. Here, we identify a previously undescribed function for"]]
["seedev_dev_177", [" study, we focus on the role of Arabidopsis APETALA2 (AP2) in controlling seed mass. AP2 encodes the founding member of a family of plant-specific transcription factors that contains an  [CLS] AP2/EREBP (ethylene responsive\nelement binding protein) domain [CLS] , a conserved region of \u224860 aa involved in DNA binding (24\u201326). This transcription factor is involved in the specification of flower organ identity, establishment of flower meristem identity,\nand"]]
["seedev_dev_178", [" study, we focus on the role of Arabidopsis APETALA2 (AP2) in controlling seed mass. AP2 encodes the founding member of a family of plant-specific transcription factors that contains an  [CLS] AP2/EREBP [CLS]  (ethylene responsive\nelement binding protein) domain, a conserved region of \u224860 aa involved in DNA binding (24\u201326). This transcription factor is involved in the specification of flower organ identity,"]]
["seedev_dev_179", [" implicated to function in the control of seed\nmass (reviewed in refs. 21\u201323).\nIn this study, we focus on the role of Arabidopsis APETALA2 (AP2) in controlling seed mass.  [CLS] AP2 encodes the founding member of a family of plant-specific transcription factors that contains an AP2 [CLS] /EREBP (ethylene responsive\nelement binding protein) domain, a conserved region of \u224860 aa involved in DNA binding (24\u201326). This transcription factor is involved in the specification of flower organ identity,", " In ap2-5, the AtEBP mRNA level was increased in flowers, leaves and stems. The AP2 mRNA level of ap2-5 was also increased, especially in flowers and leaves, suggesting that  [CLS] AP2 activity also suppresses its own AP2 [CLS]  gene expression. The expression pattern of AtERF1 was similar to that of AtEBP: the AtERF1 mRNA level of ap2-5 increased in flowers, leaves and stems compared with the WT.", " leaves and stems compared with the WT. mRNA accumulation of these genes was examined in ap2-7, and similar results were obtained (data not shown). These results may suggest that  [CLS] AP2 represses the expression of ERF genes such as AtEBP, AtERF1 and the AP2 [CLS]  gene itself.\n"]]
["seedev_dev_180", [" but are detected in leaves, stems, and seedlings\nalso (24, 34), opening the possibility of a more global function for AP2. Here, we identify a previously undescribed function for  [CLS] AP2 by showing that loss-of-function ap2 [CLS]  mutations cause increases in seed mass.\n"]]
["seedev_dev_181", [" with these QTL have not been identified, other studies implicate enzymes involved\nin sugar metabolism as candidates for factors that influence seed mass (14). A series of studies with  [CLS] fava bean suggest that the relative accumulation of hexose and sucrose during seed development\nplays roles in determining seed mass through changes in seed cell number and cell size [CLS]  (14\u201316).\nSeed mass is also influenced by parent-of-origin effects (17, 18). Interploidy crosses between diploid and polyploid plants produce offspring with a maternal or paternal genomic excess.\nSeeds from"]]
["seedev_dev_182", [" with these QTL have not been identified, other studies implicate enzymes involved\nin sugar metabolism as candidates for factors that influence seed mass (14). A series of studies with  [CLS] fava bean suggest that the relative accumulation of hexose and sucrose during seed development\nplays roles in determining seed mass through changes in seed cell number [CLS]  and cell size (14\u201316).\nSeed mass is also influenced by parent-of-origin effects (17, 18). Interploidy crosses between diploid and polyploid plants produce offspring with a maternal or paternal genomic"]]
["seedev_dev_183", [" with these QTL have not been identified, other studies implicate enzymes involved\nin sugar metabolism as candidates for factors that influence seed mass (14). A series of studies with  [CLS] fava bean suggest that the relative accumulation of hexose [CLS]  and sucrose during seed development\nplays roles in determining seed mass through changes in seed cell number and cell size (14\u201316).\nSeed mass is also influenced by parent-of-origin effects"]]
["seedev_dev_184", [" with these QTL have not been identified, other studies implicate enzymes involved\nin sugar metabolism as candidates for factors that influence seed mass (14). A series of studies with  [CLS] fava bean suggest that the relative accumulation of hexose and sucrose [CLS]  during seed development\nplays roles in determining seed mass through changes in seed cell number and cell size (14\u201316).\nSeed mass is also influenced by parent-of-origin effects (17, 18)."]]
["seedev_dev_185", ["\nin sugar metabolism as candidates for factors that influence seed mass (14). A series of studies with fava bean suggest that the relative accumulation of hexose and sucrose during  [CLS] seed development\nplays roles in determining seed mass through changes in seed cell number and cell size [CLS]  (14\u201316).\nSeed mass is also influenced by parent-of-origin effects (17, 18). Interploidy crosses between diploid and polyploid plants produce offspring with a maternal or paternal genomic excess.\nSeeds from"]]
["seedev_dev_186", ["\nin sugar metabolism as candidates for factors that influence seed mass (14). A series of studies with fava bean suggest that the relative accumulation of hexose and sucrose during  [CLS] seed development\nplays roles in determining seed mass through changes in seed cell number [CLS]  and cell size (14\u201316).\nSeed mass is also influenced by parent-of-origin effects (17, 18). Interploidy crosses between diploid and polyploid plants produce offspring with a maternal or paternal genomic"]]
["seedev_dev_187", [" identified, other studies implicate enzymes involved\nin sugar metabolism as candidates for factors that influence seed mass (14). A series of studies with fava bean suggest that the relative  [CLS] accumulation of hexose and sucrose during seed development [CLS] \nplays roles in determining seed mass through changes in seed cell number and cell size (14\u201316).\nSeed mass is also influenced by parent-of-origin effects (17, 18). Interploidy crosses between"]]
["seedev_dev_188", [" identified, other studies implicate enzymes involved\nin sugar metabolism as candidates for factors that influence seed mass (14). A series of studies with fava bean suggest that the relative  [CLS] accumulation of hexose and sucrose during seed development [CLS] \nplays roles in determining seed mass through changes in seed cell number and cell size (14\u201316).\nSeed mass is also influenced by parent-of-origin effects (17, 18). Interploidy crosses between"]]
["seedev_dev_189", [" leaves, stems, and seedlings\nalso (24, 34), opening the possibility of a more global function for AP2. Here, we identify a previously undescribed function for AP2 by showing that  [CLS] loss-of-function ap2 mutations cause increases in seed mass [CLS] .\n"]]
["seedev_dev_190", [" with these QTL have not been identified, other studies implicate enzymes involved\nin sugar metabolism as candidates for factors that influence seed mass (14). A series of studies with  [CLS] fava bean suggest that the relative accumulation of hexose and sucrose during seed development\nplays roles in determining seed mass [CLS]  through changes in seed cell number and cell size (14\u201316).\nSeed mass is also influenced by parent-of-origin effects (17, 18). Interploidy crosses between diploid and polyploid plants produce offspring", " with these QTL have not been identified, other studies implicate enzymes involved\nin sugar metabolism as candidates for factors that influence seed mass (14). A series of studies with  [CLS] fava bean suggest that the relative accumulation of hexose and sucrose during seed development\nplays roles in determining seed mass through changes in seed cell number [CLS]  and cell size (14\u201316).\nSeed mass is also influenced by parent-of-origin effects (17, 18). Interploidy crosses between diploid and polyploid plants produce offspring with a maternal or paternal genomic", " with these QTL have not been identified, other studies implicate enzymes involved\nin sugar metabolism as candidates for factors that influence seed mass (14). A series of studies with  [CLS] fava bean suggest that the relative accumulation of hexose and sucrose during seed development\nplays roles in determining seed mass through changes in seed cell number and cell size [CLS]  (14\u201316).\nSeed mass is also influenced by parent-of-origin effects (17, 18). Interploidy crosses between diploid and polyploid plants produce offspring with a maternal or paternal genomic excess.\nSeeds from"]]
["seedev_dev_191", ["\nin sugar metabolism as candidates for factors that influence seed mass (14). A series of studies with fava bean suggest that the relative accumulation of hexose and sucrose during  [CLS] seed development\nplays roles in determining seed mass [CLS]  through changes in seed cell number and cell size (14\u201316).\nSeed mass is also influenced by parent-of-origin effects (17, 18). Interploidy crosses between diploid and polyploid plants produce offspring", "\nin sugar metabolism as candidates for factors that influence seed mass (14). A series of studies with fava bean suggest that the relative accumulation of hexose and sucrose during  [CLS] seed development\nplays roles in determining seed mass through changes in seed cell number [CLS]  and cell size (14\u201316).\nSeed mass is also influenced by parent-of-origin effects (17, 18). Interploidy crosses between diploid and polyploid plants produce offspring with a maternal or paternal genomic", "\nin sugar metabolism as candidates for factors that influence seed mass (14). A series of studies with fava bean suggest that the relative accumulation of hexose and sucrose during  [CLS] seed development\nplays roles in determining seed mass through changes in seed cell number and cell size [CLS]  (14\u201316).\nSeed mass is also influenced by parent-of-origin effects (17, 18). Interploidy crosses between diploid and polyploid plants produce offspring with a maternal or paternal genomic excess.\nSeeds from"]]
["seedev_dev_192", [" [CLS] ERF genes including AtEBP is regulated by AP2 [CLS]  activity (Okamuro et al., 1997). This observation lead to the investigation of the transcriptional regulation of AP2/EREBP domain-containing genes in the\ncurrent study. To investigate the relationships in the", " leaves and stems compared with the WT. mRNA accumulation of these genes was examined in ap2-7, and similar results were obtained (data not shown). These results may suggest that  [CLS] AP2 represses the expression of ERF [CLS]  genes such as AtEBP, AtERF1 and the AP2 gene itself.\n"]]
["seedev_dev_193", [" whether AP2 activity affects the AtEBP expression, we investigated mRNA accumulation of AtEBP in ap2-5. In ap2-5, the AtEBP mRNA level was increased in flowers, leaves and stems. The  [CLS] AP2 mRNA level of ap2-5 was also increased, especially in flowers and leaves [CLS] , suggesting that AP2 activity also suppresses its own AP2 gene expression. The expression pattern of AtERF1 was similar to that of AtEBP: the AtERF1 mRNA level of ap2-5 increased", " As a result, the floral homeotic phenotype was observed. To test whether AP2 activity affects the AtEBP expression, we investigated mRNA accumulation of AtEBP in ap2-5. In ap2-5, the  [CLS] AtEBP mRNA level was increased in flowers, leaves [CLS]  and stems. The AP2 mRNA level of ap2-5 was also increased, especially in flowers and leaves, suggesting that AP2 activity also suppresses its own AP2 gene expression. The expression", " increased, especially in flowers and leaves, suggesting that AP2 activity also suppresses its own AP2 gene expression. The expression pattern of AtERF1 was similar to that of AtEBP: the  [CLS] AtERF1 mRNA level of ap2-5 increased in flowers, leaves [CLS]  and stems compared with the WT. mRNA accumulation of these genes was examined in ap2-7, and similar results were obtained (data not shown). These results may suggest that AP2"]]
["seedev_dev_194", [" increased, especially in flowers and leaves, suggesting that AP2 activity also suppresses its own AP2 gene expression. The expression pattern of AtERF1 was similar to that of AtEBP: the  [CLS] AtERF1 mRNA level of ap2-5 increased in flowers, leaves and stems [CLS]  compared with the WT. mRNA accumulation of these genes was examined in ap2-7, and similar results were obtained (data not shown). These results may suggest that AP2 represses the", " As a result, the floral homeotic phenotype was observed. To test whether AP2 activity affects the AtEBP expression, we investigated mRNA accumulation of AtEBP in ap2-5. In ap2-5, the  [CLS] AtEBP mRNA level was increased in flowers, leaves and stems [CLS] . The AP2 mRNA level of ap2-5 was also increased, especially in flowers and leaves, suggesting that AP2 activity also suppresses its own AP2 gene expression. The expression pattern of"]]
["seedev_dev_195", [" As a result, the floral homeotic phenotype was observed. To test whether AP2 activity affects the AtEBP expression, we investigated mRNA accumulation of AtEBP in ap2-5. In ap2-5, the  [CLS] AtEBP mRNA level was increased in flowers [CLS] , leaves and stems. The AP2 mRNA level of ap2-5 was also increased, especially in flowers and leaves, suggesting that AP2 activity also suppresses its own AP2 gene expression. The", " whether AP2 activity affects the AtEBP expression, we investigated mRNA accumulation of AtEBP in ap2-5. In ap2-5, the AtEBP mRNA level was increased in flowers, leaves and stems. The  [CLS] AP2 mRNA level of ap2-5 was also increased, especially in flowers [CLS]  and leaves, suggesting that AP2 activity also suppresses its own AP2 gene expression. The expression pattern of AtERF1 was similar to that of AtEBP: the AtERF1 mRNA level of", " increased, especially in flowers and leaves, suggesting that AP2 activity also suppresses its own AP2 gene expression. The expression pattern of AtERF1 was similar to that of AtEBP: the  [CLS] AtERF1 mRNA level of ap2-5 increased in flowers [CLS] , leaves and stems compared with the WT. mRNA accumulation of these genes was examined in ap2-7, and similar results were obtained (data not shown). These results may suggest that"]]
["seedev_dev_196", [" mRNA levels were low in all the tissues analysed (flowers, stems and leaves). There is a point-mutation in the AP2/EREBP\ndomain of AP2 (residue Gly-159 to Glu) in the  [CLS] ap2-5 mutant, which leads to reduced transcriptional activity of AP2 [CLS]  (Jofuku et al., 1994). As a result, the floral homeotic phenotype was observed. To test whether AP2 activity affects the AtEBP expression, we investigated mRNA accumulation of AtEBP in"]]
["seedev_dev_197", [" AtERF1, each specific probe was used for Northern blot hybridization (Fig.\u00a01). In the wild type (WT), the AtEBP mRNA level was high in leaves and low in flowers, while  [CLS] AP2 mRNA levels were low in all the tissues analysed (flowers [CLS] , stems and leaves). There is a point-mutation in the AP2/EREBP\ndomain of AP2 (residue Gly-159 to Glu) in the ap2-5 mutant, which leads to reduced transcriptional activity of AP2", " AtERF1, each specific probe was used for Northern blot hybridization (Fig.\u00a01). In the wild type (WT), the AtEBP mRNA level was high in leaves and low in flowers, while  [CLS] AP2 mRNA levels were low in all the tissues analysed (flowers, stems and leaves [CLS] ). There is a point-mutation in the AP2/EREBP\ndomain of AP2 (residue Gly-159 to Glu) in the ap2-5 mutant, which leads to reduced transcriptional activity of AP2 (Jofuku et al.,", " AtERF1, each specific probe was used for Northern blot hybridization (Fig.\u00a01). In the wild type (WT), the AtEBP mRNA level was high in leaves and low in flowers, while  [CLS] AP2 mRNA levels were low in all the tissues analysed (flowers, stems [CLS]  and leaves). There is a point-mutation in the AP2/EREBP\ndomain of AP2 (residue Gly-159 to Glu) in the ap2-5 mutant, which leads to reduced transcriptional activity of AP2 (Jofuku"]]
["seedev_dev_198", [" increased, especially in flowers and leaves, suggesting that AP2 activity also suppresses its own AP2 gene expression. The expression pattern of AtERF1 was similar to that of AtEBP: the  [CLS] AtERF1 mRNA level of ap2-5 increased in flowers [CLS] , leaves and stems compared with the WT. mRNA accumulation of these genes was examined in ap2-7, and similar results were obtained (data not shown). These results may suggest that", " increased, especially in flowers and leaves, suggesting that AP2 activity also suppresses its own AP2 gene expression. The expression pattern of AtERF1 was similar to that of AtEBP: the  [CLS] AtERF1 mRNA level of ap2-5 increased in flowers, leaves and stems [CLS]  compared with the WT. mRNA accumulation of these genes was examined in ap2-7, and similar results were obtained (data not shown). These results may suggest that AP2 represses the", " increased, especially in flowers and leaves, suggesting that AP2 activity also suppresses its own AP2 gene expression. The expression pattern of AtERF1 was similar to that of AtEBP: the  [CLS] AtERF1 mRNA level of ap2-5 increased in flowers, leaves [CLS]  and stems compared with the WT. mRNA accumulation of these genes was examined in ap2-7, and similar results were obtained (data not shown). These results may suggest that AP2"]]
["seedev_dev_199", [" was high in leaves and low in flowers, while AP2 mRNA levels were low in all the tissues analysed (flowers, stems and leaves). There is a point-mutation in the  [CLS] AP2/EREBP\ndomain of AP2 [CLS]  (residue Gly-159 to Glu) in the ap2-5 mutant, which leads to reduced transcriptional activity of AP2 (Jofuku et al., 1994). As a result, the floral homeotic phenotype was observed."]]
["seedev_dev_200", [" tissues (flowers, stems and leaves). To avoid cross-hybridization among AP2, AtEBP and AtERF1, each specific probe was used for Northern blot hybridization (Fig.\u00a01). In the wild type (WT), the  [CLS] AtEBP mRNA level was high in leaves [CLS]  and low in flowers, while AP2 mRNA levels were low in all the tissues analysed (flowers, stems and leaves). There is a point-mutation in the AP2/EREBP\ndomain of AP2", " tissues (flowers, stems and leaves). To avoid cross-hybridization among AP2, AtEBP and AtERF1, each specific probe was used for Northern blot hybridization (Fig.\u00a01). In the wild type (WT), the  [CLS] AtEBP mRNA level was high in leaves and low in flowers [CLS] , while AP2 mRNA levels were low in all the tissues analysed (flowers, stems and leaves). There is a point-mutation in the AP2/EREBP\ndomain of AP2 (residue Gly-159 to Glu)"]]
["seedev_dev_201", [" domain-containing genes in the\ncurrent study. To investigate the relationships in the transcriptional regulation of AP2 and AtEBP, an analysis was made of the expression patterns of AP2 and  [CLS] ERF genes such as AtEBP [CLS]  and AtERF1 in different tissues (flowers, stems and leaves). To avoid cross-hybridization among AP2, AtEBP and AtERF1, each specific probe was used for Northern blot hybridization (Fig.\u00a01). In the", " the WT. mRNA accumulation of these genes was examined in ap2-7, and similar results were obtained (data not shown). These results may suggest that AP2 represses the expression of  [CLS] ERF genes such as AtEBP [CLS] , AtERF1 and the AP2 gene itself.\n", " [CLS] ERF genes including AtEBP [CLS]  is regulated by AP2 activity (Okamuro et al., 1997). This observation lead to the investigation of the transcriptional regulation of AP2/EREBP domain-containing genes in the\ncurrent study. To investigate"]]
["seedev_dev_202", [" domain-containing genes in the\ncurrent study. To investigate the relationships in the transcriptional regulation of AP2 and AtEBP, an analysis was made of the expression patterns of AP2 and  [CLS] ERF genes such as AtEBP and AtERF1 [CLS]  in different tissues (flowers, stems and leaves). To avoid cross-hybridization among AP2, AtEBP and AtERF1, each specific probe was used for Northern blot hybridization (Fig.\u00a01). In the wild type", " the WT. mRNA accumulation of these genes was examined in ap2-7, and similar results were obtained (data not shown). These results may suggest that AP2 represses the expression of  [CLS] ERF genes such as AtEBP, AtERF1 [CLS]  and the AP2 gene itself.\n"]]
["seedev_dev_203", [" and AtERF1 in different tissues (flowers, stems and leaves). To avoid cross-hybridization among AP2, AtEBP and AtERF1, each specific probe was used for Northern blot hybridization (Fig.\u00a01). In the  [CLS] wild type (WT), the AtEBP mRNA level was high in leaves and low in flowers, while AP2 mRNA [CLS]  levels were low in all the tissues analysed (flowers, stems and leaves). There is a point-mutation in the AP2/EREBP\ndomain of AP2 (residue Gly-159 to Glu) in the ap2-5"]]
["seedev_dev_204", [" increased, especially in flowers and leaves, suggesting that AP2 activity also suppresses its own AP2 gene expression. The expression pattern of AtERF1 was similar to that of AtEBP: the  [CLS] AtERF1 mRNA level of ap2-5 increased in flowers, leaves and stems compared with the WT [CLS] . mRNA accumulation of these genes was examined in ap2-7, and similar results were obtained (data not shown). These results may suggest that AP2 represses the expression of ERF genes"]]
["seedev_dev_205", [" and AtERF1 in different tissues (flowers, stems and leaves). To avoid cross-hybridization among AP2, AtEBP and AtERF1, each specific probe was used for Northern blot hybridization (Fig.\u00a01). In the  [CLS] wild type (WT), the AtEBP mRNA [CLS]  level was high in leaves and low in flowers, while AP2 mRNA levels were low in all the tissues analysed (flowers, stems and leaves). There is a point-mutation in"]]
["seedev_dev_206", [" whether AP2 activity affects the AtEBP expression, we investigated mRNA accumulation of AtEBP in ap2-5. In ap2-5, the AtEBP mRNA level was increased in flowers, leaves and stems. The  [CLS] AP2 mRNA level of ap2-5 [CLS]  was also increased, especially in flowers and leaves, suggesting that AP2 activity also suppresses its own AP2 gene expression. The expression pattern of AtERF1 was similar to that of", " al., 1994). As a result, the floral homeotic phenotype was observed. To test whether AP2 activity affects the AtEBP expression, we investigated mRNA accumulation of AtEBP in ap2-5. In  [CLS] ap2-5, the AtEBP mRNA [CLS]  level was increased in flowers, leaves and stems. The AP2 mRNA level of ap2-5 was also increased, especially in flowers and leaves, suggesting that AP2 activity also suppresses its", " increased, especially in flowers and leaves, suggesting that AP2 activity also suppresses its own AP2 gene expression. The expression pattern of AtERF1 was similar to that of AtEBP: the  [CLS] AtERF1 mRNA level of ap2-5 [CLS]  increased in flowers, leaves and stems compared with the WT. mRNA accumulation of these genes was examined in ap2-7, and similar results were obtained (data not shown). These results"]]
["seedev_dev_207", [" 1999; Shchennikova et\u00a0al., 2004; Yang and Jack, 2004; Yang et\u00a0al., 2003a,b), indicating the vast potential for modular-based regulation. There is also a rapidly growing body of knowledge where plant  [CLS] MADS are reported to interact with other factors, such as putative transcription factors (Causier et\u00a0al., 2003; Masiero et\u00a0al., 2002), or co-repressors (Sridhar et\u00a0al., 2006), RNA-binding proteins [CLS]  (Pelaz et\u00a0al., 2001), post-translational modifying factors (Fujita et\u00a0al., 2003Gamboa et\u00a0al., 2001; Yalovsky et\u00a0al., 2000) and others (Cseke et\u00a0al., 2007; Honma and Goto, 2001). MADS-domain transcription factors may function as"]]
["seedev_dev_208", [" also show that AGL15 functions as a transcriptional repressor in vivo, and that the region where the LxLxL motif resides is essential to the repressive function. The interaction of  [CLS] AGL15 with members of the SIN3/HDAC1 complex [CLS]  suggests a mechanism that could explain its function as a transcriptional repressor in planta.\n", " [CLS] AGL15 with members of the SIN3/HDAC1 complex [CLS]  suggests a mechanism that could explain its function as a transcriptional repressor in planta\nHistone deacetylase (HDAC) enzymes remove acetyl groups from histones, and hypoacetylation results in a decrease"]]
["seedev_dev_209", [" depending on these interactions. For instance, ectopic expression of SEPALLATA3 (SEP3) has been reported to induce AG expression outside of the floral context (Castillejo et\u00a0al., 2005). However AP1 and  [CLS] SEP3 are also able to interact with the transcription co-repressors LEUNIG (LUG [CLS] ) and SEUSS (SEU) (Sridhar et\u00a0al., 2006), which prevent ectopic AG transcription (Franks et\u00a0al., 2002; Liu and Meyerowitz, 1995). Neither LUG nor SEU are predicted to encode a recognizable DNA-binding", " depending on these interactions. For instance, ectopic expression of SEPALLATA3 (SEP3) has been reported to induce AG expression outside of the floral context (Castillejo et\u00a0al., 2005). However AP1 and  [CLS] SEP3 are also able to interact with the transcription co-repressors LEUNIG (LUG) and SEUSS (SEU [CLS] ) (Sridhar et\u00a0al., 2006), which prevent ectopic AG transcription (Franks et\u00a0al., 2002; Liu and Meyerowitz, 1995). Neither LUG nor SEU are predicted to encode a recognizable DNA-binding motif, but SEU"]]
["seedev_dev_210", [" same complex as SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1 (SERK1; Karlova et\u00a0al., 2006), no direct interaction between AGL15 and a non-MADS domain protein has yet been reported.\nHere we report that  [CLS] AGL15 interacts with members of the SIN3 histone deacetylase (HDAC [CLS] ) complex, and that a conserved LxLxL motif present in the C-terminal domain of AGL15, which has been shown to be involved in transcriptional repression in other proteins (Ohta et\u00a0al.,"]]
["seedev_dev_211", [" (SEU) (Sridhar et\u00a0al., 2006), which prevent ectopic AG transcription (Franks et\u00a0al., 2002; Liu and Meyerowitz, 1995). Neither LUG nor SEU are predicted to encode a recognizable DNA-binding motif, but  [CLS] SEU has been shown to associate in vivo with an AG cis-regulatory region containing a putative CArG motif [CLS] , perhaps through binding to DNA-bound SEP3 (Sridhar et\u00a0al., 2006).\nAGL15 preferentially accumulates in a wide variety of tissues that develop in an embryonic mode (Heck et\u00a0al., 1995; Perry et\u00a0al.,"]]
["seedev_dev_212", [" and repressors, depending on these interactions. For instance, ectopic expression of SEPALLATA3 (SEP3) has been reported to induce AG expression outside of the floral context (Castillejo et\u00a0al., 2005). However  [CLS] AP1 and SEP3 are also able to interact with the transcription co-repressors LEUNIG (LUG [CLS] ) and SEUSS (SEU) (Sridhar et\u00a0al., 2006), which prevent ectopic AG transcription (Franks et\u00a0al., 2002; Liu and Meyerowitz, 1995). Neither LUG nor SEU are predicted to encode a recognizable DNA-binding", " and repressors, depending on these interactions. For instance, ectopic expression of SEPALLATA3 (SEP3) has been reported to induce AG expression outside of the floral context (Castillejo et\u00a0al., 2005). However  [CLS] AP1 and SEP3 are also able to interact with the transcription co-repressors LEUNIG (LUG) and SEUSS (SEU [CLS] ) (Sridhar et\u00a0al., 2006), which prevent ectopic AG transcription (Franks et\u00a0al., 2002; Liu and Meyerowitz, 1995). Neither LUG nor SEU are predicted to encode a recognizable DNA-binding motif, but SEU"]]
["seedev_dev_213", [" Arabidopsis genome encoding 107 members, 39 members of which are in the MIKC subfamily (for a review, see Parenicov\u00e1et\u00a0al., 2003).\nAGAMOUS-like 15 (AGL15; At5g13790) is a member of the  [CLS] MIKC subfamily, which consist of four domains: the MADS (M), I, K, and C domains [CLS]  (for a review, see Kaufmann et\u00a0al., 2005). The MADS domain itself is comprised of 55\u201360 highly conserved amino acids, and it is this domain that associates with the DNA"]]
["seedev_dev_214", [" Arabidopsis genome encoding 107 members, 39 members of which are in the MIKC subfamily (for a review, see Parenicov\u00e1et\u00a0al., 2003).\nAGAMOUS-like 15 (AGL15; At5g13790) is a member of the  [CLS] MIKC subfamily, which consist of four domains: the MADS (M), I, K, and C domains [CLS]  (for a review, see Kaufmann et\u00a0al., 2005). The MADS domain itself is comprised of 55\u201360 highly conserved amino acids, and it is this domain that associates with the DNA"]]
["seedev_dev_215", [" Ng and Yanofsky, 2001; Pelaz et\u00a0al., 2001) or is involved in the formation of ternary complexes (Egea-Cortines et\u00a0al., 1999).\nThe literature contains a plethora of data demonstrating interactions between  [CLS] plant MADS-domain proteins [CLS]  (Causier et\u00a0al., 2003; Cseke et\u00a0al., 2007; Egea-Cortines et\u00a0al., 1999; Fan et\u00a0al., 1997; Favaro et\u00a0al., 2002, 2003; de Folter et\u00a0al., 2005; Honma and Goto, 2001; Immink et\u00a0al., 2002; Jang et\u00a0al.,", " [CLS] MADS-domain proteins comprise a large family of regulatory factors that have been identified in all eukaryotic [CLS]  kingdoms, and are involved in a diverse array of biological functions (for reviews, see Becker and Theissen, 2003; Messenguy and Dubois, 2003; Kaufmann et\u00a0al., 2005). Plants uniquely possess a", " Plants uniquely possess a subclass of MADS factors referred to as MIKC, members of which contain a second weakly conserved coiled-coil motif (the K domain). Compared with other kingdoms  [CLS] plants have greatly expanded the number of MADS-domain proteins [CLS] , with the Arabidopsis genome encoding 107 members, 39 members of which are in the MIKC subfamily (for a review, see Parenicov\u00e1et\u00a0al., 2003).\nAGAMOUS-like 15 (AGL15; At5g13790) is a member"]]
["seedev_dev_216", [" Arabidopsis genome encoding 107 members, 39 members of which are in the MIKC subfamily (for a review, see Parenicov\u00e1et\u00a0al., 2003).\nAGAMOUS-like 15 (AGL15; At5g13790) is a member of the  [CLS] MIKC subfamily, which consist of four domains: the MADS (M), I, K, and C domains [CLS]  (for a review, see Kaufmann et\u00a0al., 2005). The MADS domain itself is comprised of 55\u201360 highly conserved amino acids, and it is this domain that associates with the DNA"]]
["seedev_dev_217", [" array of biological functions (for reviews, see Becker and Theissen, 2003; Messenguy and Dubois, 2003; Kaufmann et\u00a0al., 2005). Plants uniquely possess a subclass of MADS factors referred to as  [CLS] MIKC, members of which contain a second weakly conserved coiled-coil motif (the K domain [CLS] ). Compared with other kingdoms plants have greatly expanded the number of MADS-domain proteins, with the Arabidopsis genome encoding 107 members, 39 members of which are in the MIKC subfamily"]]
["seedev_dev_218", [" element named the CArG motif (C-A/T-rich-G, with a canonical sequence of CC[A/T]6GG; for a review, see Riechmann and Meyerowitz, 1997), and AGL15 has been shown to preferentially bind a  [CLS] CArG sequence with a longer A/T-rich core (C[A/T]8G [CLS] ) in vitro (Tang and Perry, 2003). The K domain is implicated in mediating protein\u2013protein interactions (Riechmann et\u00a0al., 1996). The carboxyl-terminal (C) domain is the most divergent, and in some"]]
["seedev_dev_219", [" AGL15 and a non-MADS domain protein has yet been reported.\nHere we report that AGL15 interacts with members of the SIN3 histone deacetylase (HDAC) complex, and that a conserved  [CLS] LxLxL motif present in the C-terminal domain of AGL15 [CLS] , which has been shown to be involved in transcriptional repression in other proteins (Ohta et\u00a0al., 2001; Tiwari et\u00a0al., 2004), is required for its association with one member of this"]]
["seedev_dev_220", [" MIKC, members of which contain a second weakly conserved coiled-coil motif (the K domain). Compared with other kingdoms plants have greatly expanded the number of MADS-domain proteins, with the  [CLS] Arabidopsis genome encoding 107 members, 39 members of which are in the MIKC subfamily [CLS]  (for a review, see Parenicov\u00e1et\u00a0al., 2003).\nAGAMOUS-like 15 (AGL15; At5g13790) is a member of the MIKC subfamily, which consist of four domains: the MADS (M), I, K, and C"]]
["seedev_dev_221", [" Arabidopsis genome encoding 107 members, 39 members of which are in the MIKC subfamily (for a review, see Parenicov\u00e1et\u00a0al., 2003).\nAGAMOUS-like 15 (AGL15; At5g13790) is a member of the  [CLS] MIKC subfamily, which consist of four domains: the MADS (M), I, K, and C domains [CLS]  (for a review, see Kaufmann et\u00a0al., 2005). The MADS domain itself is comprised of 55\u201360 highly conserved amino acids, and it is this domain that associates with the DNA"]]
["seedev_dev_222", [" and repressors, depending on these interactions. For instance, ectopic expression of SEPALLATA3 (SEP3) has been reported to induce AG expression outside of the floral context (Castillejo et\u00a0al., 2005). However  [CLS] AP1 and SEP3 are also able to interact with the transcription co-repressors LEUNIG (LUG) and SEUSS (SEU) (Sridhar et\u00a0al., 2006), which prevent ectopic AG transcription [CLS]  (Franks et\u00a0al., 2002; Liu and Meyerowitz, 1995). Neither LUG nor SEU are predicted to encode a recognizable DNA-binding motif, but SEU has been shown to associate in vivo with"]]
["seedev_dev_223", [" depending on these interactions. For instance, ectopic expression of SEPALLATA3 (SEP3) has been reported to induce AG expression outside of the floral context (Castillejo et\u00a0al., 2005). However AP1 and  [CLS] SEP3 are also able to interact with the transcription co-repressors LEUNIG (LUG) and SEUSS (SEU) (Sridhar et\u00a0al., 2006), which prevent ectopic AG transcription [CLS]  (Franks et\u00a0al., 2002; Liu and Meyerowitz, 1995). Neither LUG nor SEU are predicted to encode a recognizable DNA-binding motif, but SEU has been shown to associate in vivo with"]]
["seedev_dev_224", [" Yalovsky et\u00a0al., 2000) and others (Cseke et\u00a0al., 2007; Honma and Goto, 2001). MADS-domain transcription factors may function as both transcriptional activators and repressors, depending on these interactions. For instance,  [CLS] ectopic expression of SEPALLATA3 (SEP3) has been reported to induce AG [CLS]  expression outside of the floral context (Castillejo et\u00a0al., 2005). However AP1 and SEP3 are also able to interact with the transcription co-repressors LEUNIG (LUG) and SEUSS (SEU) (Sridhar et\u00a0al.,"]]
["seedev_dev_225", [" either homo- or heterodimers to an A/T-rich cis element named the CArG motif (C-A/T-rich-G, with a canonical sequence of CC[A/T]6GG; for a review, see Riechmann and Meyerowitz, 1997), and  [CLS] AGL15 has been shown to preferentially bind a CArG sequence with a longer A/T-rich core (C[A/T]8G [CLS] ) in vitro (Tang and Perry, 2003). The K domain is implicated in mediating protein\u2013protein interactions (Riechmann et\u00a0al., 1996). The carboxyl-terminal (C) domain is the most divergent, and in some"]]
["seedev_dev_226", [" same complex as SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1 (SERK1; Karlova et\u00a0al., 2006), no direct interaction between AGL15 and a non-MADS domain protein has yet been reported.\nHere we report that  [CLS] AGL15 interacts with members of the SIN3 histone deacetylase (HDAC) complex, and that a conserved LxLxL motif present in the C-terminal domain of AGL15, which has been shown to be involved in transcriptional repression in other proteins (Ohta et\u00a0al., 2001; Tiwari et\u00a0al., 2004), is required for its association with one member of this complex, named SIN3-associated polypeptide of 18\u00a0kDa [CLS]  (SAP18), in yeast two-hybrid studies. We also show that AGL15 functions as a transcriptional repressor in vivo, and that the region where the LxLxL motif resides is essential to"]]
["seedev_dev_227", [" binds only weakly. Taken together these data suggest that AGL15 may form heterodimers, or ternary complexes with other proteins, thus modulating the specificity and function of AGL15 in planta.  [CLS] AGL15 possesses the ability to directly interact with other MADS-domain proteins [CLS]  (de Folter et\u00a0al., 2005; this study), some of which have overlapping expression patterns (de Folter et\u00a0al., 2005; Lehti-Shiu et\u00a0al., 2005). Although AGL15 has been reported as a protein co-purifying", " Lehti-Shiu et\u00a0al., 2005). Although AGL15 has been reported as a protein co-purifying in the same complex as SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1 (SERK1; Karlova et\u00a0al., 2006), no direct interaction between  [CLS] AGL15 and a non-MADS domain protein [CLS]  has yet been reported.\nHere we report that AGL15 interacts with members of the SIN3 histone deacetylase (HDAC) complex, and that a conserved LxLxL motif present in the C-terminal"]]
["seedev_dev_228", [" (SEU) (Sridhar et\u00a0al., 2006), which prevent ectopic AG transcription (Franks et\u00a0al., 2002; Liu and Meyerowitz, 1995). Neither LUG nor SEU are predicted to encode a recognizable DNA-binding motif, but  [CLS] SEU has been shown to associate in vivo with an AG cis-regulatory region containing a putative CArG motif, perhaps through binding to DNA-bound SEP3 [CLS]  (Sridhar et\u00a0al., 2006).\nAGL15 preferentially accumulates in a wide variety of tissues that develop in an embryonic mode (Heck et\u00a0al., 1995; Perry et\u00a0al., 1996, 1999; Rounsley et\u00a0al., 1995), and"]]
["seedev_dev_229", [" with the DNA (for a review, see Riechmann and Meyerowitz, 1997). The intervening (I) domain is less conserved, but forms part of the minimal DNA-binding domain (Riechmann et\u00a0al., 1996).  [CLS] MADS-domain proteins bind as either homo- or heterodimers to an A/T-rich cis element named the CArG motif [CLS]  (C-A/T-rich-G, with a canonical sequence of CC[A/T]6GG; for a review, see Riechmann and Meyerowitz, 1997), and AGL15 has been shown to preferentially bind a CArG sequence with a longer"]]
["seedev_dev_230", [" been shown to be involved in transcriptional repression in other proteins (Ohta et\u00a0al., 2001; Tiwari et\u00a0al., 2004), is required for its association with one member of this complex, named  [CLS] SIN3-associated polypeptide of 18\u00a0kDa (SAP18 [CLS] ), in yeast two-hybrid studies. We also show that AGL15 functions as a transcriptional repressor in vivo, and that the region where the LxLxL motif resides is essential to the"]]
["seedev_dev_231", [" Theissen, 2003; Messenguy and Dubois, 2003; Kaufmann et\u00a0al., 2005). Plants uniquely possess a subclass of MADS factors referred to as MIKC, members of which contain a second weakly conserved  [CLS] coiled-coil motif (the K domain [CLS] ). Compared with other kingdoms plants have greatly expanded the number of MADS-domain proteins, with the Arabidopsis genome encoding 107 members, 39 members of which are in the MIKC subfamily"]]
["seedev_dev_232", [" reported to induce AG expression outside of the floral context (Castillejo et\u00a0al., 2005). However AP1 and SEP3 are also able to interact with the transcription co-repressors LEUNIG (LUG) and  [CLS] SEUSS (SEU [CLS] ) (Sridhar et\u00a0al., 2006), which prevent ectopic AG transcription (Franks et\u00a0al., 2002; Liu and Meyerowitz, 1995). Neither LUG nor SEU are predicted to encode a recognizable DNA-binding motif, but SEU"]]
["seedev_dev_233", [" greatly expanded the number of MADS-domain proteins, with the Arabidopsis genome encoding 107 members, 39 members of which are in the MIKC subfamily (for a review, see Parenicov\u00e1et\u00a0al., 2003).\n [CLS] AGAMOUS-like 15 (AGL15 [CLS] ; At5g13790) is a member of the MIKC subfamily, which consist of four domains: the MADS (M), I, K, and C domains (for a review, see Kaufmann et\u00a0al., 2005). The"]]
["seedev_dev_234", [" which are in the MIKC subfamily (for a review, see Parenicov\u00e1et\u00a0al., 2003).\nAGAMOUS-like 15 (AGL15; At5g13790) is a member of the MIKC subfamily, which consist of four domains: the  [CLS] MADS (M), I, K, and C domains [CLS]  (for a review, see Kaufmann et\u00a0al., 2005). The MADS domain itself is comprised of 55\u201360 highly conserved amino acids, and it is this domain that associates with the DNA"]]
["seedev_dev_235", [" and others (Cseke et\u00a0al., 2007; Honma and Goto, 2001). MADS-domain transcription factors may function as both transcriptional activators and repressors, depending on these interactions. For instance, ectopic expression of  [CLS] SEPALLATA3 (SEP3 [CLS] ) has been reported to induce AG expression outside of the floral context (Castillejo et\u00a0al., 2005). However AP1 and SEP3 are also able to interact with the transcription co-repressors LEUNIG"]]
["seedev_dev_236", [" kingdoms, and are involved in a diverse array of biological functions (for reviews, see Becker and Theissen, 2003; Messenguy and Dubois, 2003; Kaufmann et\u00a0al., 2005). Plants uniquely possess a  [CLS] subclass of MADS factors referred to as MIKC [CLS] , members of which contain a second weakly conserved coiled-coil motif (the K domain). Compared with other kingdoms plants have greatly expanded the number of MADS-domain proteins, with the Arabidopsis"]]
["seedev_dev_237", [" bind a CArG sequence with a longer A/T-rich core (C[A/T]8G) in vitro (Tang and Perry, 2003). The K domain is implicated in mediating protein\u2013protein interactions (Riechmann et\u00a0al., 1996). The  [CLS] carboxyl-terminal (C) domain [CLS]  is the most divergent, and in some cases functions as a transactivation domain (Cho et\u00a0al., 1999; Honma and Goto, 2001; Lim et\u00a0al., 2000; Moon et\u00a0al., 1999; Ng and Yanofsky,"]]
["seedev_dev_238", [" domain itself is comprised of 55\u201360 highly conserved amino acids, and it is this domain that associates with the DNA (for a review, see Riechmann and Meyerowitz, 1997). The  [CLS] intervening (I) domain [CLS]  is less conserved, but forms part of the minimal DNA-binding domain (Riechmann et\u00a0al., 1996). MADS-domain proteins bind as either homo- or heterodimers to an A/T-rich cis element named the"]]
["seedev_dev_239", [" is less conserved, but forms part of the minimal DNA-binding domain (Riechmann et\u00a0al., 1996). MADS-domain proteins bind as either homo- or heterodimers to an A/T-rich cis element named the  [CLS] CArG motif (C-A/T-rich-G [CLS] , with a canonical sequence of CC[A/T]6GG; for a review, see Riechmann and Meyerowitz, 1997), and AGL15 has been shown to preferentially bind a CArG sequence with a longer A/T-rich"]]
["seedev_dev_240", [" (SERK1; Karlova et\u00a0al., 2006), no direct interaction between AGL15 and a non-MADS domain protein has yet been reported.\nHere we report that AGL15 interacts with members of the SIN3  [CLS] histone deacetylase (HDAC [CLS] ) complex, and that a conserved LxLxL motif present in the C-terminal domain of AGL15, which has been shown to be involved in transcriptional repression in other proteins (Ohta et\u00a0al.,"]]
["seedev_dev_241", [" (SEP3) has been reported to induce AG expression outside of the floral context (Castillejo et\u00a0al., 2005). However AP1 and SEP3 are also able to interact with the transcription co-repressors  [CLS] LEUNIG (LUG [CLS] ) and SEUSS (SEU) (Sridhar et\u00a0al., 2006), which prevent ectopic AG transcription (Franks et\u00a0al., 2002; Liu and Meyerowitz, 1995). Neither LUG nor SEU are predicted to encode a recognizable DNA-binding"]]
["seedev_dev_242", [" (C-A/T-rich-G, with a canonical sequence of CC[A/T]6GG; for a review, see Riechmann and Meyerowitz, 1997), and AGL15 has been shown to preferentially bind a CArG sequence with a longer  [CLS] A/T-rich core (C[A/T]8G [CLS] ) in vitro (Tang and Perry, 2003). The K domain is implicated in mediating protein\u2013protein interactions (Riechmann et\u00a0al., 1996). The carboxyl-terminal (C) domain is the most divergent, and in some"]]
["seedev_dev_243", [" conserved, but forms part of the minimal DNA-binding domain (Riechmann et\u00a0al., 1996). MADS-domain proteins bind as either homo- or heterodimers to an A/T-rich cis element named the CArG motif ( [CLS] C-A/T-rich-G, with a canonical sequence of CC[A/T]6GG [CLS] ; for a review, see Riechmann and Meyerowitz, 1997), and AGL15 has been shown to preferentially bind a CArG sequence with a longer A/T-rich core (C[A/T]8G) in vitro (Tang and"]]
["seedev_dev_244", [" study), some of which have overlapping expression patterns (de Folter et\u00a0al., 2005; Lehti-Shiu et\u00a0al., 2005). Although AGL15 has been reported as a protein co-purifying in the same complex as  [CLS] SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1 (SERK1 [CLS] ; Karlova et\u00a0al., 2006), no direct interaction between AGL15 and a non-MADS domain protein has yet been reported.\nHere we report that AGL15 interacts with members of the SIN3 histone"]]
["seedev_dev_245", [" are involved in a diverse array of biological functions (for reviews, see Becker and Theissen, 2003; Messenguy and Dubois, 2003; Kaufmann et\u00a0al., 2005). Plants uniquely possess a subclass of  [CLS] MADS factors referred to as MIKC [CLS] , members of which contain a second weakly conserved coiled-coil motif (the K domain). Compared with other kingdoms plants have greatly expanded the number of MADS-domain proteins, with the Arabidopsis"]]
["seedev_dev_246", [" the number of MADS-domain proteins, with the Arabidopsis genome encoding 107 members, 39 members of which are in the MIKC subfamily (for a review, see Parenicov\u00e1et\u00a0al., 2003).\nAGAMOUS-like 15 ( [CLS] AGL15; At5g13790 [CLS] ) is a member of the MIKC subfamily, which consist of four domains: the MADS (M), I, K, and C domains (for a review, see Kaufmann et\u00a0al., 2005). The MADS"]]
["seedev_dev_247", [" either homo- or heterodimers to an A/T-rich cis element named the CArG motif (C-A/T-rich-G, with a canonical sequence of CC[A/T]6GG; for a review, see Riechmann and Meyerowitz, 1997), and  [CLS] AGL15 has been shown to preferentially bind a CArG sequence with a longer A/T-rich core (C[A/T]8G) in vitro [CLS]  (Tang and Perry, 2003). The K domain is implicated in mediating protein\u2013protein interactions (Riechmann et\u00a0al., 1996). The carboxyl-terminal (C) domain is the most divergent, and in some cases functions", " We demonstrated that SAP18 is able to associate with DNA-bound AGL15 in vitro, but is not able to directly interact with a strong AGL15 binding site (Figure 7). Likewise,  [CLS] SAP18 also interacts with DNA-bound ERF3 in vitro [CLS] , but not with the ERF3 binding site (Song and Galbraith, 2006).\n", " complex lead to repression of gene expression (Song and Galbraith, 2006; Song et\u00a0al., 2005; Wu et\u00a0al., 2000; Yang et\u00a0al., 1996; Zhang et\u00a0al., 1997; Zhu et\u00a0al., 2001). We demonstrated that  [CLS] SAP18 is able to associate with DNA-bound AGL15 in vitro [CLS] , but is not able to directly interact with a strong AGL15 binding site (Figure 7). Likewise, SAP18 also interacts with DNA-bound ERF3 in vitro, but not with the ERF3"]]
["seedev_dev_248", [" same complex as SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1 (SERK1; Karlova et\u00a0al., 2006), no direct interaction between AGL15 and a non-MADS domain protein has yet been reported.\nHere we report that  [CLS] AGL15 interacts with members of the SIN3 histone deacetylase (HDAC) complex, and that a conserved LxLxL motif present in the C-terminal domain of AGL15, which has been shown to be involved in transcriptional repression in other proteins (Ohta et\u00a0al., 2001; Tiwari et\u00a0al., 2004), is required for its association with one member of this complex, named SIN3-associated polypeptide of 18\u00a0kDa (SAP18), in yeast two-hybrid [CLS]  studies. We also show that AGL15 functions as a transcriptional repressor in vivo, and that the region where the LxLxL motif resides is essential to the repressive function. The", " been shown to be involved in transcriptional repression in other proteins (Ohta et\u00a0al., 2001; Tiwari et\u00a0al., 2004), is required for its association with one member of this complex, named  [CLS] SIN3-associated polypeptide of 18\u00a0kDa (SAP18), in yeast two-hybrid [CLS]  studies. We also show that AGL15 functions as a transcriptional repressor in vivo, and that the region where the LxLxL motif resides is essential to the repressive function. The"]]
["seedev_dev_249", [" a canonical sequence of CC[A/T]6GG; for a review, see Riechmann and Meyerowitz, 1997), and AGL15 has been shown to preferentially bind a CArG sequence with a longer A/T-rich core ( [CLS] C[A/T]8G) in vitro [CLS]  (Tang and Perry, 2003). The K domain is implicated in mediating protein\u2013protein interactions (Riechmann et\u00a0al., 1996). The carboxyl-terminal (C) domain is the most divergent, and in some cases functions"]]
["seedev_dev_250", [" et\u00a0al., 1999; Shchennikova et\u00a0al., 2004; Yang and Jack, 2004; Yang et\u00a0al., 2003a,b), indicating the vast potential for modular-based regulation. There is also a rapidly growing body of knowledge where  [CLS] plant MADS [CLS]  are reported to interact with other factors, such as putative transcription factors (Causier et\u00a0al., 2003; Masiero et\u00a0al., 2002), or co-repressors (Sridhar et\u00a0al., 2006), RNA-binding proteins (Pelaz et\u00a0al., 2001), post-translational"]]
["seedev_dev_251", [" et\u00a0al., 1999; Shchennikova et\u00a0al., 2004; Yang and Jack, 2004; Yang et\u00a0al., 2003a,b), indicating the vast potential for modular-based regulation. There is also a rapidly growing body of knowledge where  [CLS] plant MADS are reported to interact with other factors, such as putative transcription factors (Causier et\u00a0al., 2003; Masiero et\u00a0al., 2002), or co-repressors (Sridhar et\u00a0al., 2006), RNA-binding proteins [CLS]  (Pelaz et\u00a0al., 2001), post-translational modifying factors (Fujita et\u00a0al., 2003Gamboa et\u00a0al., 2001; Yalovsky et\u00a0al., 2000) and others (Cseke et\u00a0al., 2007; Honma and Goto, 2001). MADS-domain transcription factors may function as"]]
["seedev_dev_252", [" identified in all eukaryotic kingdoms, and are involved in a diverse array of biological functions (for reviews, see Becker and Theissen, 2003; Messenguy and Dubois, 2003; Kaufmann et\u00a0al., 2005).  [CLS] Plants uniquely possess a subclass of MADS factors [CLS]  referred to as MIKC, members of which contain a second weakly conserved coiled-coil motif (the K domain). Compared with other kingdoms plants have greatly expanded the number of MADS-domain"]]
["seedev_dev_253", [" identified in all eukaryotic kingdoms, and are involved in a diverse array of biological functions (for reviews, see Becker and Theissen, 2003; Messenguy and Dubois, 2003; Kaufmann et\u00a0al., 2005).  [CLS] Plants uniquely possess a subclass of MADS factors referred to as MIKC [CLS] , members of which contain a second weakly conserved coiled-coil motif (the K domain). Compared with other kingdoms plants have greatly expanded the number of MADS-domain proteins, with the Arabidopsis"]]
["seedev_dev_254", [" identified in all eukaryotic kingdoms, and are involved in a diverse array of biological functions (for reviews, see Becker and Theissen, 2003; Messenguy and Dubois, 2003; Kaufmann et\u00a0al., 2005).  [CLS] Plants uniquely possess a subclass of MADS factors [CLS]  referred to as MIKC, members of which contain a second weakly conserved coiled-coil motif (the K domain). Compared with other kingdoms plants have greatly expanded the number of MADS-domain"]]
["seedev_dev_255", [" Goto, 2001). MADS-domain transcription factors may function as both transcriptional activators and repressors, depending on these interactions. For instance, ectopic expression of SEPALLATA3 (SEP3) has been reported to induce  [CLS] AG expression outside of the floral context [CLS]  (Castillejo et\u00a0al., 2005). However AP1 and SEP3 are also able to interact with the transcription co-repressors LEUNIG (LUG) and SEUSS (SEU) (Sridhar et\u00a0al., 2006), which prevent ectopic AG transcription"]]
["seedev_dev_256", [" We demonstrated that SAP18 is able to associate with DNA-bound AGL15 in vitro, but is not able to directly interact with a strong AGL15 binding site (Figure 7). Likewise,  [CLS] SAP18 also interacts with DNA-bound ERF3 [CLS]  in vitro, but not with the ERF3 binding site (Song and Galbraith, 2006).\n"]]
["seedev_dev_257", [" We demonstrated that SAP18 is able to associate with DNA-bound AGL15 in vitro, but is not able to directly interact with a strong AGL15 binding site (Figure 7). Likewise,  [CLS] SAP18 also interacts with DNA-bound ERF3 in vitro, but not with the ERF3 binding site [CLS]  (Song and Galbraith, 2006).\n", " complex lead to repression of gene expression (Song and Galbraith, 2006; Song et\u00a0al., 2005; Wu et\u00a0al., 2000; Yang et\u00a0al., 1996; Zhang et\u00a0al., 1997; Zhu et\u00a0al., 2001). We demonstrated that  [CLS] SAP18 is able to associate with DNA-bound AGL15 in vitro, but is not able to directly interact with a strong AGL15 binding site  [CLS] (Figure 7). Likewise, SAP18 also interacts with DNA-bound ERF3 in vitro, but not with the ERF3 binding site (Song and Galbraith, 2006).\n"]]
["seedev_dev_258", [" [CLS] Histone deacetylase (HDAC [CLS] ) enzymes remove acetyl groups from histones, and hypoacetylation results in a decrease in the space between the nucleosome and the DNA that is wrapped around it. Tighter wrapping of"]]
["seedev_dev_259", [" the DNA that is wrapped around it. Tighter wrapping of the DNA diminishes accessibility for transcription factors, leading to transcriptional repression (for a review, see de Ruijter et\u00a0al., 2003).  [CLS] SIN3-associated proteins (SAP18 [CLS]  and SAP30) have been hypothesized to stabilize the SIN3\u2013HDAC interaction (discussed by Silverstein and Ekwall, 2005). SAP18, like other core members of the SIN3/HDAC1 complex, is not believed to"]]
["seedev_dev_260", [" the DNA that is wrapped around it. Tighter wrapping of the DNA diminishes accessibility for transcription factors, leading to transcriptional repression (for a review, see de Ruijter et\u00a0al., 2003).  [CLS] SIN3-associated proteins (SAP18 and SAP30 [CLS] ) have been hypothesized to stabilize the SIN3\u2013HDAC interaction (discussed by Silverstein and Ekwall, 2005). SAP18, like other core members of the SIN3/HDAC1 complex, is not believed to directly associate"]]
["seedev_dev_261", [" to associate with DNA-bound AGL15 in vitro, but is not able to directly interact with a strong AGL15 binding site (Figure 7). Likewise, SAP18 also interacts with DNA-bound ERF3  [CLS] in vitro, but not with the ERF3 binding site [CLS]  (Song and Galbraith, 2006).\n", " and Galbraith, 2006; Song et\u00a0al., 2005; Wu et\u00a0al., 2000; Yang et\u00a0al., 1996; Zhang et\u00a0al., 1997; Zhu et\u00a0al., 2001). We demonstrated that SAP18 is able to associate with DNA-bound AGL15  [CLS] in vitro, but is not able to directly interact with a strong AGL15 binding site  [CLS] (Figure 7). Likewise, SAP18 also interacts with DNA-bound ERF3 in vitro, but not with the ERF3 binding site (Song and Galbraith, 2006).\n"]]
["seedev_dev_262", [" [CLS] SIN3/HDAC1 complex suggests a mechanism that could explain its function as a transcriptional repressor in planta [CLS] \nHistone deacetylase (HDAC) enzymes remove acetyl groups from histones, and hypoacetylation results in a decrease in the space between the nucleosome and the DNA that is wrapped around it."]]
["seedev_dev_263", [" and Wise, 2007). MAT promoter analyses have revealed several conserved cis-regulatory elements with functional relevance in the control of gene expression during seed maturation. Among them, G-box-related\nACGT elements,  [CLS] RY (CATGCA), AACA, and CTTT motifs are the best described examples (for review, see Vicente-Carbajosa and Carbonero,\n2005). The corresponding associated TFs belong to the basic leucine zipper (bZIP), B3 [CLS] , MYB, and DOF TF families, respectively.\nCooperation of these regulatory units in the control of gene expression appears to be an evolutionarily conserved pattern\nthat can be traced back"]]
["seedev_dev_264", [" 2007). MAT promoter analyses have revealed several conserved cis-regulatory elements with functional relevance in the control of gene expression during seed maturation. Among them, G-box-related\nACGT elements, RY (CATGCA),  [CLS] AACA, and CTTT motifs are the best described examples (for review, see Vicente-Carbajosa and Carbonero,\n2005). The corresponding associated TFs belong to the basic leucine zipper (bZIP), B3, MYB [CLS] , and DOF TF families, respectively.\nCooperation of these regulatory units in the control of gene expression appears to be an evolutionarily conserved pattern\nthat can be traced back to"]]
["seedev_dev_265", [" see Tunnacliffe and Wise, 2007). MAT promoter analyses have revealed several conserved cis-regulatory elements with functional relevance in the control of gene expression during seed maturation. Among them, G-box-related\n [CLS] ACGT elements, RY (CATGCA), AACA, and CTTT motifs are the best described examples (for review, see Vicente-Carbajosa and Carbonero,\n2005). The corresponding associated TFs belong to the basic leucine zipper (bZIP [CLS] ), B3, MYB, and DOF TF families, respectively.\nCooperation of these regulatory units in the control of gene expression appears to be an evolutionarily conserved pattern\nthat can be traced"]]
["seedev_dev_266", [" Spermaphyta (Vicente-Carbajosa and Carbonero, 2005; Schallau et al., 2008).\nTFs of the bZIP class, related to cereal O2-type TFs, have been identified in Arabidopsis (Lara et al., 2003), namely,  [CLS] bZIP10 and bZIP25, which have been classified into group C of the Arabidopsis bZIP TF family (Jakoby et al., 2002). Expression during seed development, specific binding to G-box-like ACGT [CLS]  elements of the albumin and cruciferin promoters,\nand in vivo regulation of these target genes have been demonstrated (Lara et al., 2003).\n"]]
["seedev_dev_267", [" and Carbonero, 2005; Schallau et al., 2008).\nTFs of the bZIP class, related to cereal O2-type TFs, have been identified in Arabidopsis (Lara et al., 2003), namely, bZIP10 and  [CLS] bZIP25, which have been classified into group C of the Arabidopsis bZIP TF family (Jakoby et al., 2002). Expression during seed development, specific binding to G-box-like ACGT [CLS]  elements of the albumin and cruciferin promoters,\nand in vivo regulation of these target genes have been demonstrated (Lara et al., 2003).\n"]]
["seedev_dev_268", [" promoter analyses have revealed several conserved cis-regulatory elements with functional relevance in the control of gene expression during seed maturation. Among them, G-box-related\nACGT elements, RY (CATGCA), AACA, and  [CLS] CTTT motifs are the best described examples (for review, see Vicente-Carbajosa and Carbonero,\n2005). The corresponding associated TFs belong to the basic leucine zipper (bZIP), B3, MYB, and DOF TF [CLS]  families, respectively.\nCooperation of these regulatory units in the control of gene expression appears to be an evolutionarily conserved pattern\nthat can be traced back to the origins of"]]
["seedev_dev_269", [" been characterized that control gene expression programs during seed maturation.\nThe class of maturation genes (MAT) expressed during seed maturation typically includes seed storage protein (SSP) genes,\nsuch as  [CLS] albumin and cruciferin genes, which are induced in early or mid-maturation phase [CLS] . The late embryogenesis abundant\n(LEA) genes are induced at later stages of maturation and include genes proposed to be involved in acquisition of desiccation\ntolerance (for review, see Tunnacliffe", " that control gene expression programs during seed maturation.\nThe class of maturation genes (MAT) expressed during seed maturation typically includes seed storage protein (SSP) genes,\nsuch as albumin and  [CLS] cruciferin genes, which are induced in early or mid-maturation phase [CLS] . The late embryogenesis abundant\n(LEA) genes are induced at later stages of maturation and include genes proposed to be involved in acquisition of desiccation\ntolerance (for review, see Tunnacliffe", " species, key TFs have been characterized that control gene expression programs during seed maturation.\nThe class of maturation genes (MAT) expressed during seed maturation typically includes seed storage protein ( [CLS] SSP) genes,\nsuch as albumin and cruciferin genes, which are induced in early or mid-maturation phase [CLS] . The late embryogenesis abundant\n(LEA) genes are induced at later stages of maturation and include genes proposed to be involved in acquisition of desiccation\ntolerance (for review, see Tunnacliffe"]]
["seedev_dev_270", [" 1997; O\u00f1ate et al., 1999). In dicot species, key TFs have been characterized that control gene expression programs during seed maturation.\nThe class of maturation genes (MAT) expressed during  [CLS] seed maturation typically includes seed storage protein (SSP [CLS] ) genes,\nsuch as albumin and cruciferin genes, which are induced in early or mid-maturation phase. The late embryogenesis abundant\n(LEA) genes are induced at later stages of maturation and"]]
["seedev_dev_271", [" expressed during seed maturation typically includes seed storage protein (SSP) genes,\nsuch as albumin and cruciferin genes, which are induced in early or mid-maturation phase. The late embryogenesis abundant\n( [CLS] LEA) genes are induced at later stages of maturation [CLS]  and include genes proposed to be involved in acquisition of desiccation\ntolerance (for review, see Tunnacliffe and Wise, 2007). MAT promoter analyses have revealed several conserved cis-regulatory elements with"]]
["seedev_dev_272", [" (O2) representing a hallmark as one of the first plant transcription factor (TF) genes cloned and characterized\n(Hartings et al., 1989; Schmidt et al., 1990). Similarly, orthologous genes from  [CLS] wheat (Triticum aestivum) (SPA [CLS] ) and barley (Hordeum vulgare) (BLZ2) play the same roles as O2 in their corresponding species (Albani et al., 1997; O\u00f1ate et al., 1999). In dicot species, key TFs have"]]
["seedev_dev_273", [" namely, bZIP10 and bZIP25, which have been classified into group C of the Arabidopsis bZIP TF family (Jakoby et al., 2002). Expression during seed development, specific binding to G-box-like  [CLS] ACGT elements of the albumin and cruciferin promoters [CLS] ,\nand in vivo regulation of these target genes have been demonstrated (Lara et al., 2003).\n", " namely, bZIP10 and bZIP25, which have been classified into group C of the Arabidopsis bZIP TF family (Jakoby et al., 2002). Expression during seed development, specific binding to G-box-like  [CLS] ACGT elements of the albumin and cruciferin promoters [CLS] ,\nand in vivo regulation of these target genes have been demonstrated (Lara et al., 2003).\n"]]
["seedev_dev_274", [" evolutionarily conserved pattern\nthat can be traced back to the origins of the Spermaphyta (Vicente-Carbajosa and Carbonero, 2005; Schallau et al., 2008).\nTFs of the bZIP class, related to  [CLS] cereal O2-type [CLS]  TFs, have been identified in Arabidopsis (Lara et al., 2003), namely, bZIP10 and bZIP25, which have been classified into group C of the Arabidopsis bZIP TF family (Jakoby et", " conserved pattern\nthat can be traced back to the origins of the Spermaphyta (Vicente-Carbajosa and Carbonero, 2005; Schallau et al., 2008).\nTFs of the bZIP class, related to cereal  [CLS] O2-type TFs, have been identified in Arabidopsis [CLS]  (Lara et al., 2003), namely, bZIP10 and bZIP25, which have been classified into group C of the Arabidopsis bZIP TF family (Jakoby et al., 2002). Expression during seed development,"]]
["seedev_dev_275", [" Spermaphyta (Vicente-Carbajosa and Carbonero, 2005; Schallau et al., 2008).\nTFs of the bZIP class, related to cereal O2-type TFs, have been identified in Arabidopsis (Lara et al., 2003), namely,  [CLS] bZIP10 and bZIP25, which have been classified into group C of the Arabidopsis bZIP TF family (Jakoby et al., 2002). Expression during seed development [CLS] , specific binding to G-box-like ACGT elements of the albumin and cruciferin promoters,\nand in vivo regulation of these target genes have been demonstrated (Lara et al., 2003).\n"]]
["seedev_dev_276", [" one of the first plant transcription factor (TF) genes cloned and characterized\n(Hartings et al., 1989; Schmidt et al., 1990). Similarly, orthologous genes from wheat (Triticum aestivum) (SPA) and  [CLS] barley (Hordeum vulgare) (BLZ2 [CLS] ) play the same roles as O2 in their corresponding species (Albani et al., 1997; O\u00f1ate et al., 1999). In dicot species, key TFs have been characterized that control gene"]]
["seedev_dev_277", [" and Wise, 2007). MAT promoter analyses have revealed several conserved cis-regulatory elements with functional relevance in the control of gene expression during seed maturation. Among them, G-box-related\nACGT elements,  [CLS] RY (CATGCA [CLS] ), AACA, and CTTT motifs are the best described examples (for review, see Vicente-Carbajosa and Carbonero,\n2005). The corresponding associated TFs belong to the basic leucine zipper (bZIP), B3, MYB,"]]
["seedev_dev_278", [" and Carbonero, 2005; Schallau et al., 2008).\nTFs of the bZIP class, related to cereal O2-type TFs, have been identified in Arabidopsis (Lara et al., 2003), namely, bZIP10 and  [CLS] bZIP25, which have been classified into group C of the Arabidopsis bZIP TF family (Jakoby et al., 2002). Expression during seed development [CLS] , specific binding to G-box-like ACGT elements of the albumin and cruciferin promoters,\nand in vivo regulation of these target genes have been demonstrated (Lara et al., 2003).\n"]]
["seedev_dev_279", [" them, G-box-related\nACGT elements, RY (CATGCA), AACA, and CTTT motifs are the best described examples (for review, see Vicente-Carbajosa and Carbonero,\n2005). The corresponding associated TFs belong to the  [CLS] basic leucine zipper (bZIP [CLS] ), B3, MYB, and DOF TF families, respectively.\nCooperation of these regulatory units in the control of gene expression appears to be an evolutionarily conserved pattern\nthat can be traced"]]
["seedev_dev_280", [" 1999). In dicot species, key TFs have been characterized that control gene expression programs during seed maturation.\nThe class of maturation genes (MAT) expressed during seed maturation typically includes  [CLS] seed storage protein (SSP) genes [CLS] ,\nsuch as albumin and cruciferin genes, which are induced in early or mid-maturation phase. The late embryogenesis abundant\n(LEA) genes are induced at later stages of maturation and include"]]
["seedev_dev_281", [" hallmark as one of the first plant transcription factor (TF) genes cloned and characterized\n(Hartings et al., 1989; Schmidt et al., 1990). Similarly, orthologous genes from wheat (Triticum aestivum) ( [CLS] SPA) and barley (Hordeum vulgare) (BLZ2) play the same roles as O2 [CLS]  in their corresponding species (Albani et al., 1997; O\u00f1ate et al., 1999). In dicot species, key TFs have been characterized that control gene expression programs during seed maturation.\nThe"]]
["seedev_dev_282", ["\nand tightly regulated (Gutierrez et al., 2007). An understanding of gene expression control in the seed was tackled from early studies in plant molecular biology, with\nmaize (Zea mays)  [CLS] Opaque2 (O2 [CLS] ) representing a hallmark as one of the first plant transcription factor (TF) genes cloned and characterized\n(Hartings et al., 1989; Schmidt et al., 1990). Similarly, orthologous genes from wheat"]]
["seedev_dev_283", [" maturation genes (MAT) expressed during seed maturation typically includes seed storage protein (SSP) genes,\nsuch as albumin and cruciferin genes, which are induced in early or mid-maturation phase. The  [CLS] late embryogenesis abundant\n(LEA) genes [CLS]  are induced at later stages of maturation and include genes proposed to be involved in acquisition of desiccation\ntolerance (for review, see Tunnacliffe and Wise, 2007). MAT promoter analyses"]]
["seedev_dev_284", [" first plant transcription factor (TF) genes cloned and characterized\n(Hartings et al., 1989; Schmidt et al., 1990). Similarly, orthologous genes from wheat (Triticum aestivum) (SPA) and barley (Hordeum vulgare) ( [CLS] BLZ2) play the same roles as O2 [CLS]  in their corresponding species (Albani et al., 1997; O\u00f1ate et al., 1999). In dicot species, key TFs have been characterized that control gene expression programs during seed maturation.\nThe"]]
["seedev_dev_285", [" surrounding layers of maternal origin. Seed\ndevelopment can be divided into three phases: first, embryogenesis is characterized by cell division and differentiation until\nembryo morphology is established. Second, the  [CLS] maturation phase is dominated by storage compound accumulation, growth arrest,\nand acquisition of desiccation tolerance [CLS] . Third, the embryo can enter into a dormancy state that is broken upon germination.\nWith respect to seed morphology, physiology, and gene regulation, considerable variations occur among species. Arabidopsis"]]
["seedev_dev_286", [" a well-established model system for dicot seed development, and several similarities and differences\nwith monocot model systems have been described (Vicente-Carbajosa and Carbonero, 2005; Santos-Mendoza et al., 2008).\nImportant  [CLS] programs of gene expression related to the metabolic changes that occur during seed maturation [CLS]  are highly coordinated\nand tightly regulated (Gutierrez et al., 2007). An understanding of gene expression control in the seed was tackled from early studies in plant molecular biology, with", " (BLZ2) play the same roles as O2 in their corresponding species (Albani et al., 1997; O\u00f1ate et al., 1999). In dicot species, key TFs have been characterized that control  [CLS] gene expression programs during seed maturation [CLS] .\nThe class of maturation genes (MAT) expressed during seed maturation typically includes seed storage protein (SSP) genes,\nsuch as albumin and cruciferin genes, which are induced in early or", " allow the\nfully developed embryo to enter a desiccated and metabolically quiescent\nstate ([52]\u00a0and\u00a0[13]).\nUpon reception of the appropriate signals, the dormant embryo\ngerminates, and seedling development begins. Thus,  [CLS] seed maturation and\nmetabolic quiescence interrupt the morphogenetic processes [CLS]  that occur\nduring embryogenesis and seedling development. This unique form of\ndevelopment underlies, in part, a plant's ability to make seeds, a trait\nthat has conferred significant selective advantages"]]
["seedev_dev_287", [" (BLZ2) play the same roles as O2 in their corresponding species (Albani et al., 1997; O\u00f1ate et al., 1999). In dicot species, key TFs have been characterized that control  [CLS] gene expression programs during seed [CLS]  maturation.\nThe class of maturation genes (MAT) expressed during seed maturation typically includes seed storage protein (SSP) genes,\nsuch as albumin and cruciferin genes, which are induced in early"]]
["seedev_dev_288", [" surrounding layers of maternal origin. Seed\ndevelopment can be divided into three phases: first, embryogenesis is characterized by cell division and differentiation until\nembryo morphology is established. Second, the  [CLS] maturation phase is dominated by storage compound accumulation [CLS] , growth arrest,\nand acquisition of desiccation tolerance. Third, the embryo can enter into a dormancy state that is broken upon germination.\nWith respect to seed morphology, physiology, and gene"]]
["seedev_dev_289", [" 2008).\nTFs of the bZIP class, related to cereal O2-type TFs, have been identified in Arabidopsis (Lara et al., 2003), namely, bZIP10 and bZIP25, which have been classified into  [CLS] group C of the Arabidopsis bZIP [CLS]  TF family (Jakoby et al., 2002). Expression during seed development, specific binding to G-box-like ACGT elements of the albumin and cruciferin promoters,\nand in vivo regulation of these target"]]
["seedev_dev_290", [" and Carbonero, 2005; Schallau et al., 2008).\nTFs of the bZIP class, related to cereal O2-type TFs, have been identified in Arabidopsis (Lara et al., 2003), namely, bZIP10 and  [CLS] bZIP25, which have been classified into group C [CLS]  of the Arabidopsis bZIP TF family (Jakoby et al., 2002). Expression during seed development, specific binding to G-box-like ACGT elements of the albumin and cruciferin promoters,\nand in vivo"]]
["seedev_dev_291", [" Spermaphyta (Vicente-Carbajosa and Carbonero, 2005; Schallau et al., 2008).\nTFs of the bZIP class, related to cereal O2-type TFs, have been identified in Arabidopsis (Lara et al., 2003), namely,  [CLS] bZIP10 and bZIP25, which have been classified into group C [CLS]  of the Arabidopsis bZIP TF family (Jakoby et al., 2002). Expression during seed development, specific binding to G-box-like ACGT elements of the albumin and cruciferin promoters,\nand in vivo"]]
["seedev_dev_292", [" species, key TFs have been characterized that control gene expression programs during seed maturation.\nThe class of maturation genes (MAT) expressed during seed maturation typically includes seed storage protein ( [CLS] SSP) genes,\nsuch as albumin and cruciferin genes [CLS] , which are induced in early or mid-maturation phase. The late embryogenesis abundant\n(LEA) genes are induced at later stages of maturation and include genes proposed to be involved in"]]
["seedev_dev_293", [" appears to be an evolutionarily conserved pattern\nthat can be traced back to the origins of the Spermaphyta (Vicente-Carbajosa and Carbonero, 2005; Schallau et al., 2008).\nTFs of the  [CLS] bZIP class, related to cereal O2-type [CLS]  TFs, have been identified in Arabidopsis (Lara et al., 2003), namely, bZIP10 and bZIP25, which have been classified into group C of the Arabidopsis bZIP TF family (Jakoby et"]]
["seedev_dev_294", [" species, key TFs have been characterized that control gene expression programs during seed maturation.\nThe class of maturation genes (MAT) expressed during seed maturation typically includes seed storage protein ( [CLS] SSP) genes,\nsuch as albumin and cruciferin genes [CLS] , which are induced in early or mid-maturation phase. The late embryogenesis abundant\n(LEA) genes are induced at later stages of maturation and include genes proposed to be involved in"]]
["seedev_dev_295", [" tightly regulated (Gutierrez et al., 2007). An understanding of gene expression control in the seed was tackled from early studies in plant molecular biology, with\nmaize (Zea mays) Opaque2 ( [CLS] O2) representing a hallmark as one of the first plant transcription factor (TF) genes [CLS]  cloned and characterized\n(Hartings et al., 1989; Schmidt et al., 1990). Similarly, orthologous genes from wheat (Triticum aestivum) (SPA) and barley (Hordeum vulgare) (BLZ2) play the same roles as"]]
["seedev_dev_296", [" 2008).\nTFs of the bZIP class, related to cereal O2-type TFs, have been identified in Arabidopsis (Lara et al., 2003), namely, bZIP10 and bZIP25, which have been classified into  [CLS] group C of the Arabidopsis [CLS]  bZIP TF family (Jakoby et al., 2002). Expression during seed development, specific binding to G-box-like ACGT elements of the albumin and cruciferin promoters,\nand in vivo regulation of these"]]
["seedev_dev_297", [" are highly coordinated\nand tightly regulated (Gutierrez et al., 2007). An understanding of gene expression control in the seed was tackled from early studies in plant molecular biology, with\n [CLS] maize (Zea mays) Opaque2 (O2 [CLS] ) representing a hallmark as one of the first plant transcription factor (TF) genes cloned and characterized\n(Hartings et al., 1989; Schmidt et al., 1990). Similarly, orthologous genes from wheat"]]
["seedev_dev_298", [" bZIP class, related to cereal O2-type TFs, have been identified in Arabidopsis (Lara et al., 2003), namely, bZIP10 and bZIP25, which have been classified into group C of the  [CLS] Arabidopsis bZIP [CLS]  TF family (Jakoby et al., 2002). Expression during seed development, specific binding to G-box-like ACGT elements of the albumin and cruciferin promoters,\nand in vivo regulation of these target", " appears to be an evolutionarily conserved pattern\nthat can be traced back to the origins of the Spermaphyta (Vicente-Carbajosa and Carbonero, 2005; Schallau et al., 2008).\nTFs of the  [CLS] bZIP class, related to cereal O2-type TFs, have been identified in Arabidopsis [CLS]  (Lara et al., 2003), namely, bZIP10 and bZIP25, which have been classified into group C of the Arabidopsis bZIP TF family (Jakoby et al., 2002). Expression during seed development,"]]
["seedev_dev_299", [" are highly coordinated\nand tightly regulated (Gutierrez et al., 2007). An understanding of gene expression control in the seed was tackled from early studies in plant molecular biology, with\n [CLS] maize (Zea mays) Opaque2 (O2) representing a hallmark as one of the first plant transcription factor (TF) genes [CLS]  cloned and characterized\n(Hartings et al., 1989; Schmidt et al., 1990). Similarly, orthologous genes from wheat (Triticum aestivum) (SPA) and barley (Hordeum vulgare) (BLZ2) play the same roles as"]]
["seedev_dev_300", [" 1997; O\u00f1ate et al., 1999). In dicot species, key TFs have been characterized that control gene expression programs during seed maturation.\nThe class of maturation genes (MAT) expressed during  [CLS] seed maturation typically includes seed storage protein (SSP [CLS] ) genes,\nsuch as albumin and cruciferin genes, which are induced in early or mid-maturation phase. The late embryogenesis abundant\n(LEA) genes are induced at later stages of maturation and"]]
["seedev_dev_301", [" from wheat (Triticum aestivum) (SPA) and barley (Hordeum vulgare) (BLZ2) play the same roles as O2 in their corresponding species (Albani et al., 1997; O\u00f1ate et al., 1999). In  [CLS] dicot species, key TFs have been characterized that control gene expression programs [CLS]  during seed maturation.\nThe class of maturation genes (MAT) expressed during seed maturation typically includes seed storage protein (SSP) genes,\nsuch as albumin and cruciferin genes, which are induced"]]
["seedev_dev_302", [" (Shigyo et\u00a0al., 2006).\nDNA binding specificity has been studied for proteins that contain a single AP2 repeat. Proteins of the ERF subfamily bind to ethylene response elements (ERE) or  [CLS] GCC boxes. These boxes consist of 11-bp sequences (TAAGAGGCCGCC [CLS] ) exhibiting a GCCGCC core required for protein binding (Ohme-Takagi and Shinshi, 1995; Fujimoto et\u00a0al., 2000; Song et\u00a0al., 2005). The solution structure of the AP2 domain of AtERF1 bound to"]]
["seedev_dev_303", [" AP2/EREBP family in A.\u00a0thaliana (Feng et\u00a0al., 2005). The AP2/EREBP family members are classified in groups based on the number of AP2 domains and the presence of other domains. The  [CLS] EREBP family (122 members), which has a single AP2 domain [CLS] , is composed of two subgroups, namely the ERF (65 members) and DREB subfamilies (57 members). Proteins of the RAV family (six members) contain one AP2 domain and a second", " The EREBP family (122 members), which has a single AP2 domain, is composed of two subgroups, namely the ERF (65 members) and DREB subfamilies (57 members). Proteins of the  [CLS] RAV family (six members) contain one AP2 domain [CLS]  and a second DNA binding domain (the B3-like domain). The AP2 family (19 members), which has two AP2 domains, is further divided into two monophyletic groups, the APETALA2-like and", " glycolysis, the fatty acid synthesis pathway, and the biotin and lipoic acid biosynthetic pathways (Ruuska et\u00a0al., 2002; Baud et\u00a0al., 2007a).\nWRI1 is a member of the APETALA2/ethylene-responsive element binding ( [CLS] AP2/EREBP) proteins, one of the largest transcription factor families in A.\u00a0thaliana (Riechmann et\u00a0al., 2000). This family is best characterized by a common AP2 domain [CLS]  of about 60 amino acids that is important for DNA binding (Jofuku et\u00a0al., 1994; Okamuro et\u00a0al., 1997; Riechmann and Meyerowitz, 1998; Sakuma et\u00a0al., 2002). While the AP2/EREBP transcription factor"]]
["seedev_dev_304", [" The EREBP family (122 members), which has a single AP2 domain, is composed of two subgroups, namely the ERF (65 members) and DREB subfamilies (57 members). Proteins of the  [CLS] RAV family (six members) contain one AP2 domain and a second DNA binding domain (the B3-like domain [CLS] ). The AP2 family (19 members), which has two AP2 domains, is further divided into two monophyletic groups, the APETALA2-like and AINTEGUMENTA (ANT)-like groups. Depending on the publications, the WRI1-like"]]
["seedev_dev_305", [" common AP2 domain of about 60 amino acids that is important for DNA binding (Jofuku et\u00a0al., 1994; Okamuro et\u00a0al., 1997; Riechmann and Meyerowitz, 1998; Sakuma et\u00a0al., 2002). While the  [CLS] AP2/EREBP transcription factor family is unique to plants [CLS] , proteins containing homologues of the AP2 domain have been identified in cyanobacteria, ciliates and viruses, where they are predicted to function as mobile endonucleases (Magnani et\u00a0al., 2004; Wessler, 2005;", " function as mobile endonucleases (Magnani et\u00a0al., 2004; Wessler, 2005; Shigyo et\u00a0al., 2006). Based on the presence of the conserved AP2-like domains, 147 proteins were identified as belonging to the  [CLS] AP2/EREBP family in A.\u00a0thaliana [CLS]  (Feng et\u00a0al., 2005). The AP2/EREBP family members are classified in groups based on the number of AP2 domains and the presence of other domains. The EREBP family (122 members),", " glycolysis, the fatty acid synthesis pathway, and the biotin and lipoic acid biosynthetic pathways (Ruuska et\u00a0al., 2002; Baud et\u00a0al., 2007a).\nWRI1 is a member of the APETALA2/ethylene-responsive element binding ( [CLS] AP2/EREBP) proteins, one of the largest transcription factor families in A.\u00a0thaliana [CLS]  (Riechmann et\u00a0al., 2000). This family is best characterized by a common AP2 domain of about 60 amino acids that is important for DNA binding (Jofuku et\u00a0al., 1994; Okamuro et\u00a0al.,"]]
["seedev_dev_306", [" GCC box has been determined (Allen et\u00a0al., 1998). Proteins of the DREB subfamily bind to dehydration response elements (DREs)/C-repeats containing the core sequence CCGAC (Baker et\u00a0al., 1994). The single  [CLS] AP2 repeat of the RAV1 [CLS]  transcription factor has been shown to bind to a CAACA motif, whereas the B3 domain binds to a CACCTG sequence (Kagaya et\u00a0al., 1999). Little is known about the interactions", " of the AINTEGUMENTA (ANT) protein determined in\u00a0vitro is 5\u2032-gCAC(A/G)N(A/T)TcCC(a/g)ANG(c/t)-3\u2032 (Nole-Wilson and Krizek, 2000). This consensus is much longer than sites recognized by proteins containing a single AP2 repeat. Each  [CLS] AP2 repeat of ANT [CLS]  contacts juxtaposed subsites within the consensus sequence, demonstrating that ANT utilizes a mode of DNA recognition distinct from that used by proteins containing a single AP2 domain (Krizek, 2003)."]]
["seedev_dev_307", [" binding (Jofuku et\u00a0al., 1994; Okamuro et\u00a0al., 1997; Riechmann and Meyerowitz, 1998; Sakuma et\u00a0al., 2002). While the AP2/EREBP transcription factor family is unique to plants, proteins containing homologues of the  [CLS] AP2 domain have been identified in cyanobacteria, ciliates [CLS]  and viruses, where they are predicted to function as mobile endonucleases (Magnani et\u00a0al., 2004; Wessler, 2005; Shigyo et\u00a0al., 2006). Based on the presence of the conserved AP2-like domains, 147", " binding (Jofuku et\u00a0al., 1994; Okamuro et\u00a0al., 1997; Riechmann and Meyerowitz, 1998; Sakuma et\u00a0al., 2002). While the AP2/EREBP transcription factor family is unique to plants, proteins containing homologues of the  [CLS] AP2 domain have been identified in cyanobacteria [CLS] , ciliates and viruses, where they are predicted to function as mobile endonucleases (Magnani et\u00a0al., 2004; Wessler, 2005; Shigyo et\u00a0al., 2006). Based on the presence of the conserved AP2-like domains,", " binding (Jofuku et\u00a0al., 1994; Okamuro et\u00a0al., 1997; Riechmann and Meyerowitz, 1998; Sakuma et\u00a0al., 2002). While the AP2/EREBP transcription factor family is unique to plants, proteins containing homologues of the  [CLS] AP2 domain have been identified in cyanobacteria, ciliates and viruses [CLS] , where they are predicted to function as mobile endonucleases (Magnani et\u00a0al., 2004; Wessler, 2005; Shigyo et\u00a0al., 2006). Based on the presence of the conserved AP2-like domains, 147 proteins were"]]
["seedev_dev_308", [" ERF (65 members) and DREB subfamilies (57 members). Proteins of the RAV family (six members) contain one AP2 domain and a second DNA binding domain (the B3-like domain). The  [CLS] AP2 family (19 members), which has two AP2 domains [CLS] , is further divided into two monophyletic groups, the APETALA2-like and AINTEGUMENTA (ANT)-like groups. Depending on the publications, the WRI1-like group, composed of WRI1, At2g41710, At1g16060 and At1g79700, is either"]]
["seedev_dev_309", [" in cyanobacteria, ciliates and viruses, where they are predicted to function as mobile endonucleases (Magnani et\u00a0al., 2004; Wessler, 2005; Shigyo et\u00a0al., 2006). Based on the presence of the conserved  [CLS] AP2-like domains, 147 proteins were identified as belonging to the AP2/EREBP [CLS]  family in A.\u00a0thaliana (Feng et\u00a0al., 2005). The AP2/EREBP family members are classified in groups based on the number of AP2 domains and the presence of other domains. The EREBP"]]
["seedev_dev_310", [" determined (Allen et\u00a0al., 1998). Proteins of the DREB subfamily bind to dehydration response elements (DREs)/C-repeats containing the core sequence CCGAC (Baker et\u00a0al., 1994). The single AP2 repeat of the  [CLS] RAV1 transcription factor has been shown to bind to a CAACA motif, whereas the B3 domain [CLS]  binds to a CACCTG sequence (Kagaya et\u00a0al., 1999). Little is known about the interactions between members of the AP2 family of proteins and DNA. A consensus binding sequence of"]]
["seedev_dev_311", [" et\u00a0al., 2005). The solution structure of the AP2 domain of AtERF1 bound to the GCC box has been determined (Allen et\u00a0al., 1998). Proteins of the DREB subfamily bind to  [CLS] dehydration response elements (DREs)/C-repeats containing the core sequence CCGAC [CLS]  (Baker et\u00a0al., 1994). The single AP2 repeat of the RAV1 transcription factor has been shown to bind to a CAACA motif, whereas the B3 domain binds to a CACCTG"]]
["seedev_dev_312", [" studied for proteins that contain a single AP2 repeat. Proteins of the ERF subfamily bind to ethylene response elements (ERE) or GCC boxes. These boxes consist of 11-bp sequences ( [CLS] TAAGAGGCCGCC) exhibiting a GCCGCC [CLS]  core required for protein binding (Ohme-Takagi and Shinshi, 1995; Fujimoto et\u00a0al., 2000; Song et\u00a0al., 2005). The solution structure of the AP2 domain of AtERF1 bound to the GCC box"]]
["seedev_dev_313", [" boxes consist of 11-bp sequences (TAAGAGGCCGCC) exhibiting a GCCGCC core required for protein binding (Ohme-Takagi and Shinshi, 1995; Fujimoto et\u00a0al., 2000; Song et\u00a0al., 2005). The solution structure of the  [CLS] AP2 domain of AtERF1 [CLS]  bound to the GCC box has been determined (Allen et\u00a0al., 1998). Proteins of the DREB subfamily bind to dehydration response elements (DREs)/C-repeats containing the core sequence CCGAC (Baker et\u00a0al.,"]]
["seedev_dev_314", [" not been possible to determine whether all of the transcription factors of the AP2 family share a similar mode of DNA recognition.\nIn this paper, it is shown that  [CLS] WRI1 can be used in a seed-specific manner to enhance the transcription level of glycolytic and fatty acid biosynthetic genes [CLS]  in tissues where these genes are already expressed. Consistent with this, it is demonstrated that WRI1 is able to regulate in\u00a0planta the activity of the BCCP2 and PKp-\u03b21 promoters.", " BCCP2 and PKp-\u03b21 promoters. In addition, electrophoretic mobility-shift assays and yeast one-hybrid experiments show that WRI1 is able to interact with the BCCP2 promoter. These results strongly suggest that  [CLS] WRI1, which is a limiting factor of lipogenic gene [CLS]  expression in seeds, directly induces the transcriptional activation of these genes at the onset of the maturation phase. Functional dissections of the PKp-\u03b21 and BCCP2 promoters allow isolating putative", " not been possible to determine whether all of the transcription factors of the AP2 family share a similar mode of DNA recognition.\nIn this paper, it is shown that  [CLS] WRI1 can be used in a seed-specific manner to enhance the transcription level of glycolytic and fatty acid biosynthetic genes [CLS]  in tissues where these genes are already expressed. Consistent with this, it is demonstrated that WRI1 is able to regulate in\u00a0planta the activity of the BCCP2 and PKp-\u03b21 promoters."]]
["seedev_dev_315", [" seed-specific manner to enhance the transcription level of glycolytic and fatty acid biosynthetic genes in tissues where these genes are already expressed. Consistent with this, it is demonstrated that  [CLS] WRI1 is able to regulate in\u00a0planta the activity of the BCCP2 and PKp-\u03b21 promoters [CLS] . In addition, electrophoretic mobility-shift assays and yeast one-hybrid experiments show that WRI1 is able to interact with the BCCP2 promoter. These results strongly suggest that WRI1, which is a", " seed-specific manner to enhance the transcription level of glycolytic and fatty acid biosynthetic genes in tissues where these genes are already expressed. Consistent with this, it is demonstrated that  [CLS] WRI1 is able to regulate in\u00a0planta the activity of the BCCP2 and PKp-\u03b21 promoters [CLS] . In addition, electrophoretic mobility-shift assays and yeast one-hybrid experiments show that WRI1 is able to interact with the BCCP2 promoter. These results strongly suggest that WRI1, which is a"]]
["seedev_dev_316", [" a direct target of LEAFY COTYLEDON2 (LEC2) that specifies the regulatory action of this master regulator of seed maturation towards fatty acid metabolism (Baud et\u00a0al., 2007a). Putative targets of  [CLS] WRI1 encode enzymes of late glycolysis, the fatty acid synthesis pathway, and the biotin and lipoic acid biosynthetic pathways [CLS]  (Ruuska et\u00a0al., 2002; Baud et\u00a0al., 2007a).\nWRI1 is a member of the APETALA2/ethylene-responsive element binding (AP2/EREBP) proteins, one of the largest transcription factor families in A.\u00a0thaliana (Riechmann et\u00a0al., 2000).", " a direct target of LEAFY COTYLEDON2 (LEC2) that specifies the regulatory action of this master regulator of seed maturation towards fatty acid metabolism (Baud et\u00a0al., 2007a). Putative targets of  [CLS] WRI1 encode enzymes of late glycolysis [CLS] , the fatty acid synthesis pathway, and the biotin and lipoic acid biosynthetic pathways (Ruuska et\u00a0al., 2002; Baud et\u00a0al., 2007a).\nWRI1 is a member of the APETALA2/ethylene-responsive element binding (AP2/EREBP)", " a direct target of LEAFY COTYLEDON2 (LEC2) that specifies the regulatory action of this master regulator of seed maturation towards fatty acid metabolism (Baud et\u00a0al., 2007a). Putative targets of  [CLS] WRI1 encode enzymes of late glycolysis, the fatty acid synthesis [CLS]  pathway, and the biotin and lipoic acid biosynthetic pathways (Ruuska et\u00a0al., 2002; Baud et\u00a0al., 2007a).\nWRI1 is a member of the APETALA2/ethylene-responsive element binding (AP2/EREBP) proteins, one of the", " a direct target of LEAFY COTYLEDON2 (LEC2) that specifies the regulatory action of this master regulator of seed maturation towards fatty acid metabolism (Baud et\u00a0al., 2007a). Putative targets of  [CLS] WRI1 encode enzymes of late glycolysis, the fatty acid synthesis pathway, and the biotin and lipoic acid biosynthetic pathways [CLS]  (Ruuska et\u00a0al., 2002; Baud et\u00a0al., 2007a).\nWRI1 is a member of the APETALA2/ethylene-responsive element binding (AP2/EREBP) proteins, one of the largest transcription factor families in A.\u00a0thaliana (Riechmann et\u00a0al., 2000).", " trans-regulatory elements. This hypothesis has been strengthened by the isolation and characterization of the WRINKLED1 (WRI1) transcription factor (Focks and Benning, 1998; Cernac and Benning, 2004; Masaki et\u00a0al., 2005).  [CLS] WRI1 is a direct target of LEAFY COTYLEDON2 (LEC2) that specifies the regulatory action of this master regulator of seed maturation towards fatty acid metabolism [CLS]  (Baud et\u00a0al., 2007a). Putative targets of WRI1 encode enzymes of late glycolysis, the fatty acid synthesis pathway, and the biotin and lipoic acid biosynthetic pathways (Ruuska et\u00a0al., 2002; Baud"]]
["seedev_dev_317", [" the isolation and characterization of the WRINKLED1 (WRI1) transcription factor (Focks and Benning, 1998; Cernac and Benning, 2004; Masaki et\u00a0al., 2005). WRI1 is a direct target of LEAFY COTYLEDON2 ( [CLS] LEC2) that specifies the regulatory action of this master regulator of seed maturation [CLS]  towards fatty acid metabolism (Baud et\u00a0al., 2007a). Putative targets of WRI1 encode enzymes of late glycolysis, the fatty acid synthesis pathway, and the biotin and lipoic acid biosynthetic pathways"]]
["seedev_dev_318", [" a CACCTG sequence (Kagaya et\u00a0al., 1999). Little is known about the interactions between members of the AP2 family of proteins and DNA. A consensus binding sequence of the AINTEGUMENTA ( [CLS] ANT) protein determined in\u00a0vitro is 5\u2032-gCAC(A/G)N(A/T)TcCC(a/g)ANG(c/t)-3\u2032 [CLS]  (Nole-Wilson and Krizek, 2000). This consensus is much longer than sites recognized by proteins containing a single AP2 repeat. Each AP2 repeat of ANT contacts juxtaposed subsites within the"]]
["seedev_dev_319", [" GCC box has been determined (Allen et\u00a0al., 1998). Proteins of the DREB subfamily bind to dehydration response elements (DREs)/C-repeats containing the core sequence CCGAC (Baker et\u00a0al., 1994). The single  [CLS] AP2 repeat of the RAV1 transcription factor has been shown to bind to a CAACA [CLS]  motif, whereas the B3 domain binds to a CACCTG sequence (Kagaya et\u00a0al., 1999). Little is known about the interactions between members of the AP2 family of proteins and DNA."]]
["seedev_dev_320", [" it is demonstrated that WRI1 is able to regulate in\u00a0planta the activity of the BCCP2 and PKp-\u03b21 promoters. In addition, electrophoretic mobility-shift assays and yeast one-hybrid experiments show that  [CLS] WRI1 is able to interact with the BCCP2 promoter [CLS] . These results strongly suggest that WRI1, which is a limiting factor of lipogenic gene expression in seeds, directly induces the transcriptional activation of these genes at the onset of"]]
["seedev_dev_321", [" (DREs)/C-repeats containing the core sequence CCGAC (Baker et\u00a0al., 1994). The single AP2 repeat of the RAV1 transcription factor has been shown to bind to a CAACA motif, whereas the  [CLS] B3 domain binds to a CACCTG [CLS]  sequence (Kagaya et\u00a0al., 1999). Little is known about the interactions between members of the AP2 family of proteins and DNA. A consensus binding sequence of the AINTEGUMENTA (ANT) protein"]]
["seedev_dev_322", [" boxes consist of 11-bp sequences (TAAGAGGCCGCC) exhibiting a GCCGCC core required for protein binding (Ohme-Takagi and Shinshi, 1995; Fujimoto et\u00a0al., 2000; Song et\u00a0al., 2005). The solution structure of the  [CLS] AP2 domain of AtERF1 bound to the GCC box [CLS]  has been determined (Allen et\u00a0al., 1998). Proteins of the DREB subfamily bind to dehydration response elements (DREs)/C-repeats containing the core sequence CCGAC (Baker et\u00a0al., 1994). The single AP2 repeat"]]
["seedev_dev_323", [" 2005) or as a part of the ANT-like group (Shigyo et\u00a0al., 2006).\nDNA binding specificity has been studied for proteins that contain a single AP2 repeat. Proteins of the  [CLS] ERF subfamily bind to ethylene response elements [CLS]  (ERE) or GCC boxes. These boxes consist of 11-bp sequences (TAAGAGGCCGCC) exhibiting a GCCGCC core required for protein binding (Ohme-Takagi and Shinshi, 1995; Fujimoto et\u00a0al., 2000; Song et\u00a0al., 2005)."]]
["seedev_dev_324", [" Fujimoto et\u00a0al., 2000; Song et\u00a0al., 2005). The solution structure of the AP2 domain of AtERF1 bound to the GCC box has been determined (Allen et\u00a0al., 1998). Proteins of the  [CLS] DREB subfamily bind to dehydration response elements [CLS]  (DREs)/C-repeats containing the core sequence CCGAC (Baker et\u00a0al., 1994). The single AP2 repeat of the RAV1 transcription factor has been shown to bind to a CAACA motif, whereas the"]]
["seedev_dev_325", [" domain). The AP2 family (19 members), which has two AP2 domains, is further divided into two monophyletic groups, the APETALA2-like and AINTEGUMENTA (ANT)-like groups. Depending on the publications, the  [CLS] WRI1-like group, composed of WRI1, At2g41710, At1g16060 and At1g79700, is either presented as a third monophyletic group of the AP2 family [CLS]  (Nole-Wilson et\u00a0al., 2005) or as a part of the ANT-like group (Shigyo et\u00a0al., 2006).\nDNA binding specificity has been studied for proteins that contain a single AP2 repeat. Proteins", " domain). The AP2 family (19 members), which has two AP2 domains, is further divided into two monophyletic groups, the APETALA2-like and AINTEGUMENTA (ANT)-like groups. Depending on the publications, the  [CLS] WRI1-like group, composed of WRI1, At2g41710, At1g16060 and At1g79700, is either presented as a third monophyletic group of the AP2 family (Nole-Wilson et\u00a0al., 2005) or as a part of the ANT-like [CLS]  group (Shigyo et\u00a0al., 2006).\nDNA binding specificity has been studied for proteins that contain a single AP2 repeat. Proteins of the ERF subfamily bind to ethylene response elements (ERE)"]]
["seedev_dev_326", [" ERF (65 members) and DREB subfamilies (57 members). Proteins of the RAV family (six members) contain one AP2 domain and a second DNA binding domain (the B3-like domain). The  [CLS] AP2 family (19 members), which has two AP2 domains, is further divided into two monophyletic groups, the APETALA2-like [CLS]  and AINTEGUMENTA (ANT)-like groups. Depending on the publications, the WRI1-like group, composed of WRI1, At2g41710, At1g16060 and At1g79700, is either presented as a third monophyletic group of the AP2"]]
["seedev_dev_327", [" AP2/EREBP family in A.\u00a0thaliana (Feng et\u00a0al., 2005). The AP2/EREBP family members are classified in groups based on the number of AP2 domains and the presence of other domains. The  [CLS] EREBP family (122 members), which has a single AP2 domain, is composed of two subgroups, namely the ERF (65 members) and DREB [CLS]  subfamilies (57 members). Proteins of the RAV family (six members) contain one AP2 domain and a second DNA binding domain (the B3-like domain). The AP2 family (19 members), which"]]
["seedev_dev_328", [" 2007a). Putative targets of WRI1 encode enzymes of late glycolysis, the fatty acid synthesis pathway, and the biotin and lipoic acid biosynthetic pathways (Ruuska et\u00a0al., 2002; Baud et\u00a0al., 2007a).\n [CLS] WRI1 is a member of the APETALA2/ethylene-responsive element binding (AP2/EREBP [CLS] ) proteins, one of the largest transcription factor families in A.\u00a0thaliana (Riechmann et\u00a0al., 2000). This family is best characterized by a common AP2 domain of about 60 amino acids that", " domain). The AP2 family (19 members), which has two AP2 domains, is further divided into two monophyletic groups, the APETALA2-like and AINTEGUMENTA (ANT)-like groups. Depending on the publications, the  [CLS] WRI1-like group, composed of WRI1 [CLS] , At2g41710, At1g16060 and At1g79700, is either presented as a third monophyletic group of the AP2 family (Nole-Wilson et\u00a0al., 2005) or as a part of the ANT-like group (Shigyo et\u00a0al.,", " 2007a). Putative targets of WRI1 encode enzymes of late glycolysis, the fatty acid synthesis pathway, and the biotin and lipoic acid biosynthetic pathways (Ruuska et\u00a0al., 2002; Baud et\u00a0al., 2007a).\n [CLS] WRI1 is a member of the APETALA2/ethylene-responsive element binding (AP2/EREBP) proteins [CLS] , one of the largest transcription factor families in A.\u00a0thaliana (Riechmann et\u00a0al., 2000). This family is best characterized by a common AP2 domain of about 60 amino acids that is"]]
["seedev_dev_329", [" ERF (65 members) and DREB subfamilies (57 members). Proteins of the RAV family (six members) contain one AP2 domain and a second DNA binding domain (the B3-like domain). The  [CLS] AP2 family (19 members), which has two AP2 domains, is further divided into two monophyletic groups, the APETALA2-like and AINTEGUMENTA (ANT)-like [CLS]  groups. Depending on the publications, the WRI1-like group, composed of WRI1, At2g41710, At1g16060 and At1g79700, is either presented as a third monophyletic group of the AP2 family (Nole-Wilson et\u00a0al.,"]]
["seedev_dev_330", [" AP2/EREBP family in A.\u00a0thaliana (Feng et\u00a0al., 2005). The AP2/EREBP family members are classified in groups based on the number of AP2 domains and the presence of other domains. The  [CLS] EREBP family (122 members), which has a single AP2 domain, is composed of two subgroups, namely the ERF [CLS]  (65 members) and DREB subfamilies (57 members). Proteins of the RAV family (six members) contain one AP2 domain and a second DNA binding domain (the B3-like domain). The AP2"]]
["seedev_dev_331", [" enzymes of late glycolysis, the fatty acid synthesis pathway, and the biotin and lipoic acid biosynthetic pathways (Ruuska et\u00a0al., 2002; Baud et\u00a0al., 2007a).\nWRI1 is a member of the  [CLS] APETALA2/ethylene-responsive element binding (AP2/EREBP) proteins [CLS] , one of the largest transcription factor families in A.\u00a0thaliana (Riechmann et\u00a0al., 2000). This family is best characterized by a common AP2 domain of about 60 amino acids that is"]]
["seedev_dev_332", [" and a second DNA binding domain (the B3-like domain). The AP2 family (19 members), which has two AP2 domains, is further divided into two monophyletic groups, the APETALA2-like and  [CLS] AINTEGUMENTA (ANT)-like [CLS]  groups. Depending on the publications, the WRI1-like group, composed of WRI1, At2g41710, At1g16060 and At1g79700, is either presented as a third monophyletic group of the AP2 family (Nole-Wilson et\u00a0al.,"]]
["seedev_dev_333", [" part of the ANT-like group (Shigyo et\u00a0al., 2006).\nDNA binding specificity has been studied for proteins that contain a single AP2 repeat. Proteins of the ERF subfamily bind to  [CLS] ethylene response elements (ERE) or GCC boxes [CLS] . These boxes consist of 11-bp sequences (TAAGAGGCCGCC) exhibiting a GCCGCC core required for protein binding (Ohme-Takagi and Shinshi, 1995; Fujimoto et\u00a0al., 2000; Song et\u00a0al., 2005). The solution structure of"]]
["seedev_dev_334", [" suggests that those members of the pathway are co-regulated, and presumably share common cis- and trans-regulatory elements. This hypothesis has been strengthened by the isolation and characterization of the  [CLS] WRINKLED1 (WRI1 [CLS] ) transcription factor (Focks and Benning, 1998; Cernac and Benning, 2004; Masaki et\u00a0al., 2005). WRI1 is a direct target of LEAFY COTYLEDON2 (LEC2) that specifies the regulatory action of this"]]
["seedev_dev_335", [" part of the ANT-like group (Shigyo et\u00a0al., 2006).\nDNA binding specificity has been studied for proteins that contain a single AP2 repeat. Proteins of the ERF subfamily bind to  [CLS] ethylene response elements (ERE [CLS] ) or GCC boxes. These boxes consist of 11-bp sequences (TAAGAGGCCGCC) exhibiting a GCCGCC core required for protein binding (Ohme-Takagi and Shinshi, 1995; Fujimoto et\u00a0al., 2000; Song et\u00a0al., 2005). The"]]
["seedev_dev_336", [" et\u00a0al., 2005). The solution structure of the AP2 domain of AtERF1 bound to the GCC box has been determined (Allen et\u00a0al., 1998). Proteins of the DREB subfamily bind to  [CLS] dehydration response elements (DREs [CLS] )/C-repeats containing the core sequence CCGAC (Baker et\u00a0al., 1994). The single AP2 repeat of the RAV1 transcription factor has been shown to bind to a CAACA motif, whereas the B3"]]
["seedev_dev_337", [" enzymes of late glycolysis, the fatty acid synthesis pathway, and the biotin and lipoic acid biosynthetic pathways (Ruuska et\u00a0al., 2002; Baud et\u00a0al., 2007a).\nWRI1 is a member of the  [CLS] APETALA2/ethylene-responsive element binding (AP2 [CLS] /EREBP) proteins, one of the largest transcription factor families in A.\u00a0thaliana (Riechmann et\u00a0al., 2000). This family is best characterized by a common AP2 domain of about 60 amino acids that"]]
["seedev_dev_338", [" to a CACCTG sequence (Kagaya et\u00a0al., 1999). Little is known about the interactions between members of the AP2 family of proteins and DNA. A consensus binding sequence of the  [CLS] AINTEGUMENTA (ANT [CLS] ) protein determined in\u00a0vitro is 5\u2032-gCAC(A/G)N(A/T)TcCC(a/g)ANG(c/t)-3\u2032 (Nole-Wilson and Krizek, 2000). This consensus is much longer than sites recognized by proteins containing a single AP2 repeat. Each AP2 repeat of ANT"]]
["seedev_dev_339", [" strengthened by the isolation and characterization of the WRINKLED1 (WRI1) transcription factor (Focks and Benning, 1998; Cernac and Benning, 2004; Masaki et\u00a0al., 2005). WRI1 is a direct target of  [CLS] LEAFY COTYLEDON2 (LEC2 [CLS] ) that specifies the regulatory action of this master regulator of seed maturation towards fatty acid metabolism (Baud et\u00a0al., 2007a). Putative targets of WRI1 encode enzymes of late glycolysis, the"]]
["seedev_dev_340", [" enzymes of late glycolysis, the fatty acid synthesis pathway, and the biotin and lipoic acid biosynthetic pathways (Ruuska et\u00a0al., 2002; Baud et\u00a0al., 2007a).\nWRI1 is a member of the APETALA2/ [CLS] ethylene-responsive element binding (AP2/EREBP) proteins [CLS] , one of the largest transcription factor families in A.\u00a0thaliana (Riechmann et\u00a0al., 2000). This family is best characterized by a common AP2 domain of about 60 amino acids that is"]]
["seedev_dev_341", [" trans-regulatory elements. This hypothesis has been strengthened by the isolation and characterization of the WRINKLED1 (WRI1) transcription factor (Focks and Benning, 1998; Cernac and Benning, 2004; Masaki et\u00a0al., 2005).  [CLS] WRI1 is a direct target of LEAFY COTYLEDON2 (LEC2 [CLS] ) that specifies the regulatory action of this master regulator of seed maturation towards fatty acid metabolism (Baud et\u00a0al., 2007a). Putative targets of WRI1 encode enzymes of late glycolysis, the"]]
["seedev_dev_342", [" domain). The AP2 family (19 members), which has two AP2 domains, is further divided into two monophyletic groups, the APETALA2-like and AINTEGUMENTA (ANT)-like groups. Depending on the publications, the  [CLS] WRI1-like group, composed of WRI1, At2g41710, At1g16060 [CLS]  and At1g79700, is either presented as a third monophyletic group of the AP2 family (Nole-Wilson et\u00a0al., 2005) or as a part of the ANT-like group (Shigyo et\u00a0al., 2006).\nDNA"]]
["seedev_dev_343", [" domain). The AP2 family (19 members), which has two AP2 domains, is further divided into two monophyletic groups, the APETALA2-like and AINTEGUMENTA (ANT)-like groups. Depending on the publications, the  [CLS] WRI1-like group, composed of WRI1, At2g41710, At1g16060 and At1g79700 [CLS] , is either presented as a third monophyletic group of the AP2 family (Nole-Wilson et\u00a0al., 2005) or as a part of the ANT-like group (Shigyo et\u00a0al., 2006).\nDNA binding specificity"]]
["seedev_dev_344", [" domain). The AP2 family (19 members), which has two AP2 domains, is further divided into two monophyletic groups, the APETALA2-like and AINTEGUMENTA (ANT)-like groups. Depending on the publications, the  [CLS] WRI1-like group, composed of WRI1, At2g41710 [CLS] , At1g16060 and At1g79700, is either presented as a third monophyletic group of the AP2 family (Nole-Wilson et\u00a0al., 2005) or as a part of the ANT-like group (Shigyo et\u00a0al., 2006)."]]
["seedev_dev_345", [" in cyanobacteria, ciliates and viruses, where they are predicted to function as mobile endonucleases (Magnani et\u00a0al., 2004; Wessler, 2005; Shigyo et\u00a0al., 2006). Based on the presence of the conserved  [CLS] AP2-like domains, 147 proteins were identified as belonging to the AP2/EREBP family in A.\u00a0thaliana [CLS]  (Feng et\u00a0al., 2005). The AP2/EREBP family members are classified in groups based on the number of AP2 domains and the presence of other domains. The EREBP family (122 members),"]]
["seedev_dev_346", [" a CACCTG sequence (Kagaya et\u00a0al., 1999). Little is known about the interactions between members of the AP2 family of proteins and DNA. A consensus binding sequence of the AINTEGUMENTA ( [CLS] ANT) protein determined in\u00a0vitro [CLS]  is 5\u2032-gCAC(A/G)N(A/T)TcCC(a/g)ANG(c/t)-3\u2032 (Nole-Wilson and Krizek, 2000). This consensus is much longer than sites recognized by proteins containing a single AP2 repeat. Each AP2 repeat of ANT contacts juxtaposed subsites"]]
["seedev_dev_347", [" (Kagaya et\u00a0al., 1999). Little is known about the interactions between members of the AP2 family of proteins and DNA. A consensus binding sequence of the AINTEGUMENTA (ANT) protein determined  [CLS] in\u00a0vitro is 5\u2032-gCAC(A/G)N(A/T)TcCC(a/g)ANG(c/t)-3\u2032 [CLS]  (Nole-Wilson and Krizek, 2000). This consensus is much longer than sites recognized by proteins containing a single AP2 repeat. Each AP2 repeat of ANT contacts juxtaposed subsites within the"]]
["seedev_dev_348", [" 2007a). Putative targets of WRI1 encode enzymes of late glycolysis, the fatty acid synthesis pathway, and the biotin and lipoic acid biosynthetic pathways (Ruuska et\u00a0al., 2002; Baud et\u00a0al., 2007a).\n [CLS] WRI1 is a member of the APETALA2/ethylene-responsive element binding (AP2/EREBP) proteins, one of the largest transcription factor families in A.\u00a0thaliana [CLS]  (Riechmann et\u00a0al., 2000). This family is best characterized by a common AP2 domain of about 60 amino acids that is important for DNA binding (Jofuku et\u00a0al., 1994; Okamuro et\u00a0al.,", " seed-specific manner to enhance the transcription level of glycolytic and fatty acid biosynthetic genes in tissues where these genes are already expressed. Consistent with this, it is demonstrated that  [CLS] WRI1 is able to regulate in\u00a0planta [CLS]  the activity of the BCCP2 and PKp-\u03b21 promoters. In addition, electrophoretic mobility-shift assays and yeast one-hybrid experiments show that WRI1 is able to interact with the BCCP2 promoter. These"]]
["seedev_dev_349", [" enzymes of late glycolysis, the fatty acid synthesis pathway, and the biotin and lipoic acid biosynthetic pathways (Ruuska et\u00a0al., 2002; Baud et\u00a0al., 2007a).\nWRI1 is a member of the  [CLS] APETALA2/ethylene-responsive element binding (AP2/EREBP) proteins, one of the largest transcription factor families in A.\u00a0thaliana [CLS]  (Riechmann et\u00a0al., 2000). This family is best characterized by a common AP2 domain of about 60 amino acids that is important for DNA binding (Jofuku et\u00a0al., 1994; Okamuro et\u00a0al.,"]]
["seedev_dev_350", [" BCCP2 and PKp-\u03b21 promoters. In addition, electrophoretic mobility-shift assays and yeast one-hybrid experiments show that WRI1 is able to interact with the BCCP2 promoter. These results strongly suggest that  [CLS] WRI1, which is a limiting factor of lipogenic gene expression in seeds [CLS] , directly induces the transcriptional activation of these genes at the onset of the maturation phase. Functional dissections of the PKp-\u03b21 and BCCP2 promoters allow isolating putative binding sites to"]]
["seedev_dev_351", [" BCCP2 and PKp-\u03b21 promoters. In addition, electrophoretic mobility-shift assays and yeast one-hybrid experiments show that WRI1 is able to interact with the BCCP2 promoter. These results strongly suggest that  [CLS] WRI1, which is a limiting factor of lipogenic gene expression in seeds, directly induces the transcriptional activation of these genes at the onset of the maturation phase [CLS] . Functional dissections of the PKp-\u03b21 and BCCP2 promoters allow isolating putative binding sites to be present in several target promoters of WRI1. Finally, the modification of the consensus sequence"]]
["seedev_dev_352", [" transcription level of glycolytic and fatty acid biosynthetic genes in tissues where these genes are already expressed. Consistent with this, it is demonstrated that WRI1 is able to regulate  [CLS] in\u00a0planta the activity of the BCCP2 and PKp-\u03b21 promoters [CLS] . In addition, electrophoretic mobility-shift assays and yeast one-hybrid experiments show that WRI1 is able to interact with the BCCP2 promoter. These results strongly suggest that WRI1, which is a", " transcription level of glycolytic and fatty acid biosynthetic genes in tissues where these genes are already expressed. Consistent with this, it is demonstrated that WRI1 is able to regulate  [CLS] in\u00a0planta the activity of the BCCP2 and PKp-\u03b21 promoters [CLS] . In addition, electrophoretic mobility-shift assays and yeast one-hybrid experiments show that WRI1 is able to interact with the BCCP2 promoter. These results strongly suggest that WRI1, which is a"]]
["seedev_dev_353", [" mobility-shift assays and yeast one-hybrid experiments show that WRI1 is able to interact with the BCCP2 promoter. These results strongly suggest that WRI1, which is a limiting factor of  [CLS] lipogenic gene expression in seeds [CLS] , directly induces the transcriptional activation of these genes at the onset of the maturation phase. Functional dissections of the PKp-\u03b21 and BCCP2 promoters allow isolating putative binding sites to"]]
["seedev_dev_354", [" mobility-shift assays and yeast one-hybrid experiments show that WRI1 is able to interact with the BCCP2 promoter. These results strongly suggest that WRI1, which is a limiting factor of  [CLS] lipogenic gene expression in seeds, directly induces the transcriptional activation of these genes at the onset of the maturation phase [CLS] . Functional dissections of the PKp-\u03b21 and BCCP2 promoters allow isolating putative binding sites to be present in several target promoters of WRI1. Finally, the modification of the consensus sequence"]]
["seedev_dev_355", [" [CLS] miRNAs are to prevent the precocious expression of differentiation-promoting\ntranscription factors during early embryogenesis [CLS]  and to enable proper pattern formation.\n", " defects in both patterning and maturation gene expression.\nOne of the earliest perceptible roles of plant miRNAs is to repress transcription factors (Fig. 2C). We propose that, by repressing  [CLS] differentiation-promoting transcription factors (including SPL10, SPL11, ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4), miRNAs [CLS]  maintain the potential of preglobular cells to generate diverse cell types at the subsequent globular stages. Since\nthe reduction of WOX2 transcripts in dcl1 eight-cell embryos was the first", " perceptible roles of plant miRNAs is to repress transcription factors (Fig. 2C). We propose that, by repressing differentiation-promoting transcription factors (including SPL10, SPL11, ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4),  [CLS] miRNAs maintain the potential of preglobular cells to generate diverse cell types at the subsequent globular stages [CLS] . Since\nthe reduction of WOX2 transcripts in dcl1 eight-cell embryos was the first detectable differentiation defect, and homeobox genes related to WOX2 have been implicated in maintaining stem cells"]]
["seedev_dev_356", [" [CLS] miRNAs are to prevent the precocious expression of differentiation-promoting\ntranscription factors during early embryogenesis and to enable proper pattern formation [CLS] .\n"]]
["seedev_dev_357", [" PHV, and TCP4), miRNAs maintain the potential of preglobular cells to generate diverse cell types at the subsequent globular stages. Since\nthe reduction of WOX2 transcripts in dcl1 eight-cell  [CLS] embryos was the first detectable differentiation defect [CLS] , and homeobox genes related to WOX2 have been implicated in maintaining stem cells during post-embryonic development (Laux et al. 1996; Mayer et al. 1998; Wu et al. 2005), we", " et al. 2009; Wu et al. 2009; Yamaguchi et al. 2009). This role for SPL10 and SPL11 repression might be tied to the requirement of these targets for the  [CLS] patterning defects observed in dcl1 embryos [CLS] . Perhaps the premature induction of maturation-phase genes arrests morphogenesis before it is complete.\nLater in development, the miR156-mediated repression of SPL10 and SPL11 must presumably be overcome in order", " of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors such as ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4. A link between  [CLS] delayed reduction of maternal transcripts and the morphogenesis phenotypes observed in MZdicer embryos [CLS]  awaits\nexperimental confirmation. The same is true for the precocious expression of maturation transcripts and the patterning phenotypes\nobserved in dcl1 embryos, although SPL10 and SPL11 have been experimentally", " PHB, PHV, and TCP4. A link between delayed reduction of maternal transcripts and the morphogenesis phenotypes observed in MZdicer embryos awaits\nexperimental confirmation. The same is true for the  [CLS] precocious expression of maturation transcripts and the patterning phenotypes\nobserved in dcl1 embryos [CLS] , although SPL10 and SPL11 have been experimentally linked to defects in both patterning and maturation gene expression.\nOne of the earliest perceptible roles of plant miRNAs is to repress", " [CLS] embryos lack miR156 and exhibit premature expression of miR156 targets [CLS]  SPL10 and SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also", " (Laux et al. 1996; Mayer et al. 1998; Wu et al. 2005), we speculate that premature expression of miRNA targets leads to the reduction of WOX2 transcripts in dcl1  [CLS] embryos and ultimately contributes to precocious differentiation and subsequent loss of developmental potential in preglobular\ncell types [CLS] .\nThe two transcription factor genes that were most derepressed in eight-cell dcl1 embryos were miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11, for which transcripts were up-regulated \u2265150-fold (\u2265600-fold if only the", " (Laux et al. 1996; Mayer et al. 1998; Wu et al. 2005), we speculate that premature expression of miRNA targets leads to the reduction of WOX2 transcripts in dcl1  [CLS] embryos and ultimately contributes to precocious differentiation [CLS]  and subsequent loss of developmental potential in preglobular\ncell types.\nThe two transcription factor genes that were most derepressed in eight-cell dcl1 embryos were miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11,", " targets SPL10 and SPL11, for which transcripts were up-regulated \u2265150-fold (\u2265600-fold if only the homozygous mutant embryos contributed to the increase).\nThese two genes were redundantly required for the  [CLS] embryonic patterning defects observed in dcl1 embryos [CLS]  (Table 1; Fig. 4A,D). The ability to suppress such a pleiotropic phenotype by knocking out/down only two miRNA targets was surprising when considering\nthat dozens of miRNA targets were", " [CLS] embryos lack miR156 and exhibit premature expression of miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis [CLS] . We propose\nthat additional plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors such as ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4. A link between delayed reduction", "\n[53]\u00a0and\u00a0[39]). As summarized in Figure 1, the lec1 mutation is pleiotropic, indicating several roles in late embryo development. LEC1 is required for specific aspects of seed maturation. lec1\nmutant  [CLS] embryos are intolerant of desiccation and show defects in the\nexpression of some, but not all, maturation-specific genes [CLS]  ([28],\n[53]\u00a0and\u00a0[39]). LEC1 is also involved in inhibiting premature germination. lec1\nmutant embryos exhibit morphological and molecular characteristics of\nboth embryogenesis and postgerminative seedling development, showing\nthat aspects of", "\nactivated in that they are domed and possess leaf primordia, unlike\ntheir wild-type counterparts that are flat and do not contain leaf\nprimordia. Defects in seed maturation: lec1 mutant  [CLS] embryos are intolerant of desiccation [CLS]  and normally die if dried on the plant. However, lec1\nembryos isolated before desiccation can be germinated to produce\nfertile homozygous mutant plants. The promoter of a 7S storage", "\n[53]\u00a0and\u00a0[39]). As summarized in Figure 1, the lec1 mutation is pleiotropic, indicating several roles in late embryo development. LEC1 is required for specific aspects of seed maturation. lec1\nmutant  [CLS] embryos are intolerant of desiccation [CLS]  and show defects in the\nexpression of some, but not all, maturation-specific genes ([28],\n[53]\u00a0and\u00a0[39]). LEC1 is also involved in inhibiting premature germination. lec1\nmutant embryos exhibit morphological and"]]
["seedev_dev_358", [" genes related to WOX2 have been implicated in maintaining stem cells during post-embryonic development (Laux et al. 1996; Mayer et al. 1998; Wu et al. 2005), we speculate that  [CLS] premature expression of miRNA targets leads to the reduction of WOX2 transcripts in dcl1 embryos and ultimately contributes to precocious differentiation and subsequent loss of developmental potential in preglobular\ncell types [CLS] .\nThe two transcription factor genes that were most derepressed in eight-cell dcl1 embryos were miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11, for which transcripts were up-regulated \u2265150-fold (\u2265600-fold if only the", " genes related to WOX2 have been implicated in maintaining stem cells during post-embryonic development (Laux et al. 1996; Mayer et al. 1998; Wu et al. 2005), we speculate that  [CLS] premature expression of miRNA targets leads to the reduction of WOX2 transcripts in dcl1 embryos and ultimately contributes to precocious differentiation [CLS]  and subsequent loss of developmental potential in preglobular\ncell types.\nThe two transcription factor genes that were most derepressed in eight-cell dcl1 embryos were miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11,"]]
["seedev_dev_359", [" double mutants do not suppress dcl1-null embryonic phenotypes (Grigg et al. 2009), suggesting that the misregulation of other miRNA targets is required for the dcl1 embryonic phenotypes. Perhaps the  [CLS] loss of both miR156-mediated regulation of SPL transcripts and miR166-mediated regulation\nof HD-ZIPIII transcripts in dcl1 embryos is responsible for the embryonic patterning [CLS]  phenotypes observed. Future characterization of how multiple miRNA/target\ninteractions facilitate embryonic cell differentiation will contribute to a better understanding of how the basic plant body\nplan is established during"]]
["seedev_dev_360", [" a maturation phase, when they\naccumulate storage proteins, undergo desiccation tolerance, and prepare to enter into a state of dormancy prior to germination.\nWe found that miR156-mediated regulation of  [CLS] SPL10 and SPL11 prevents the transcription factor products of these genes from prematurely inducing seed maturation genes before the embryo\nhas formed [CLS] . To the extent that this regulation forestalls the morphogenesis-to-maturation-phase transition, this newly identified\nrole for miR156-mediated repression of SPL genes resembles that observed for vegetative-, reproductive-, and meristem identity-phase", " morphogenesis phenotypes observed in MZdicer embryos awaits\nexperimental confirmation. The same is true for the precocious expression of maturation transcripts and the patterning phenotypes\nobserved in dcl1 embryos, although  [CLS] SPL10 and SPL11 have been experimentally linked to defects in both patterning and maturation gene expression [CLS] .\nOne of the earliest perceptible roles of plant miRNAs is to repress transcription factors (Fig. 2C). We propose that, by repressing differentiation-promoting transcription factors (including SPL10, SPL11, ARF17, CNA,", " to precocious differentiation and subsequent loss of developmental potential in preglobular\ncell types.\nThe two transcription factor genes that were most derepressed in eight-cell dcl1 embryos were miR156 targets  [CLS] SPL10 and SPL11, for which transcripts were up-regulated \u2265150-fold (\u2265600-fold if only the homozygous mutant embryos contributed to the increase).\nThese two genes were redundantly required for the embryonic patterning defects [CLS]  observed in dcl1 embryos (Table 1; Fig. 4A,D). The ability to suppress such a pleiotropic phenotype by knocking out/down only two miRNA targets was surprising when considering\nthat dozens", " [CLS] SPL10 and SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis [CLS] . We propose\nthat additional plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors such as ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4. A link between delayed reduction", " morphogenesis phenotypes observed in MZdicer embryos awaits\nexperimental confirmation. The same is true for the precocious expression of maturation transcripts and the patterning phenotypes\nobserved in dcl1 embryos, although  [CLS] SPL10 and SPL11 have been experimentally linked to defects in both patterning [CLS]  and maturation gene expression.\nOne of the earliest perceptible roles of plant miRNAs is to repress transcription factors (Fig. 2C). We propose that, by repressing differentiation-promoting transcription factors (including"]]
["seedev_dev_361", [" observed in MZdicer embryos awaits\nexperimental confirmation. The same is true for the precocious expression of maturation transcripts and the patterning phenotypes\nobserved in dcl1 embryos, although SPL10 and  [CLS] SPL11 have been experimentally linked to defects in both patterning and maturation gene expression [CLS] .\nOne of the earliest perceptible roles of plant miRNAs is to repress transcription factors (Fig. 2C). We propose that, by repressing differentiation-promoting transcription factors (including SPL10, SPL11, ARF17, CNA,", " differentiation and subsequent loss of developmental potential in preglobular\ncell types.\nThe two transcription factor genes that were most derepressed in eight-cell dcl1 embryos were miR156 targets SPL10 and  [CLS] SPL11, for which transcripts were up-regulated \u2265150-fold (\u2265600-fold if only the homozygous mutant embryos contributed to the increase).\nThese two genes were redundantly required for the embryonic patterning defects [CLS]  observed in dcl1 embryos (Table 1; Fig. 4A,D). The ability to suppress such a pleiotropic phenotype by knocking out/down only two miRNA targets was surprising when considering\nthat dozens", " observed in MZdicer embryos awaits\nexperimental confirmation. The same is true for the precocious expression of maturation transcripts and the patterning phenotypes\nobserved in dcl1 embryos, although SPL10 and  [CLS] SPL11 have been experimentally linked to defects in both patterning [CLS]  and maturation gene expression.\nOne of the earliest perceptible roles of plant miRNAs is to repress transcription factors (Fig. 2C). We propose that, by repressing differentiation-promoting transcription factors (including", " [CLS] SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis [CLS] . We propose\nthat additional plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors such as ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4. A link between delayed reduction", " phase, when they\naccumulate storage proteins, undergo desiccation tolerance, and prepare to enter into a state of dormancy prior to germination.\nWe found that miR156-mediated regulation of SPL10 and  [CLS] SPL11 prevents the transcription factor products of these genes from prematurely inducing seed maturation genes before the embryo\nhas formed [CLS] . To the extent that this regulation forestalls the morphogenesis-to-maturation-phase transition, this newly identified\nrole for miR156-mediated repression of SPL genes resembles that observed for vegetative-, reproductive-, and meristem identity-phase"]]
["seedev_dev_362", [" transcripts in addition to SPL10 and SPL11 have increased levels as early as the eight-cell stage, and all of these encode transcription factors.\nOf these seven misregulated targets, five ( [CLS] ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4) have reported embryonic functions [CLS]  after the preglobular stage (Palatnik et al. 2003; Mallory et al. 2005; Prigge et al. 2005). miR166-mediated regulation of PHB and PHV has also been reported to be important"]]
["seedev_dev_363", [" be overcome in order for the embryo to undergo the morphogenesis-to-maturation transition. Although miR156\nlevels do not appear to decrease at later stages of morphogenesis (Fig. 3A), SPL10 and  [CLS] SPL11 promoter activities do increase at the same stages that the morphogenesis-to-maturation-phase transition [CLS]  occurs (Fig. 5). Therefore, at later stages of morphogenesis, miR156 may establish a threshold that SPL10 and SPL11 transcript levels must surpass in order to accumulate and promote maturation-phase", " must presumably be overcome in order for the embryo to undergo the morphogenesis-to-maturation transition. Although miR156\nlevels do not appear to decrease at later stages of morphogenesis (Fig. 3A),  [CLS] SPL10 and SPL11 promoter activities do increase at the same stages that the morphogenesis-to-maturation-phase transition [CLS]  occurs (Fig. 5). Therefore, at later stages of morphogenesis, miR156 may establish a threshold that SPL10 and SPL11 transcript levels must surpass in order to accumulate and promote maturation-phase"]]
["seedev_dev_364", [" double mutants do not suppress dcl1-null embryonic phenotypes (Grigg et al. 2009), suggesting that the misregulation of other miRNA targets is required for the dcl1 embryonic phenotypes. Perhaps the  [CLS] loss of both miR156-mediated regulation of SPL transcripts and miR166-mediated regulation\nof HD-ZIPIII transcripts in dcl1 embryos is responsible for the embryonic patterning [CLS]  phenotypes observed. Future characterization of how multiple miRNA/target\ninteractions facilitate embryonic cell differentiation will contribute to a better understanding of how the basic plant body\nplan is established during"]]
["seedev_dev_365", [" misregulated targets, five (ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4) have reported embryonic functions after the preglobular stage (Palatnik et al. 2003; Mallory et al. 2005; Prigge et al. 2005).  [CLS] miR166-mediated regulation of PHB and PHV has also been reported to be important during early embryonic patterning [CLS]  (Grigg et al. 2009). However, phb phv double mutants do not suppress dcl1-null embryonic phenotypes (Grigg et al. 2009), suggesting that the misregulation of other miRNA targets is required"]]
["seedev_dev_366", [" of miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160,  [CLS] miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors [CLS]  such as ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4. A link between delayed reduction of maternal transcripts and the morphogenesis phenotypes observed in MZdicer embryos awaits\nexperimental confirmation. The same"]]
["seedev_dev_367", [" targets SPL10 and SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and  [CLS] miR319\u2014also forestall expression of differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors [CLS]  such as ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4. A link between delayed reduction of maternal transcripts and the morphogenesis phenotypes observed in MZdicer embryos awaits\nexperimental confirmation. The same"]]
["seedev_dev_368", [" in addition to SPL10 and SPL11 have increased levels as early as the eight-cell stage, and all of these encode transcription factors.\nOf these seven misregulated targets, five (ARF17,  [CLS] CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4) have reported embryonic functions [CLS]  after the preglobular stage (Palatnik et al. 2003; Mallory et al. 2005; Prigge et al. 2005). miR166-mediated regulation of PHB and PHV has also been reported to be important"]]
["seedev_dev_369", [" to SPL10 and SPL11 have increased levels as early as the eight-cell stage, and all of these encode transcription factors.\nOf these seven misregulated targets, five (ARF17, CNA, PHB,  [CLS] PHV, and TCP4) have reported embryonic functions [CLS]  after the preglobular stage (Palatnik et al. 2003; Mallory et al. 2005; Prigge et al. 2005). miR166-mediated regulation of PHB and PHV has also been reported to be important"]]
["seedev_dev_370", [" and SPL11 have increased levels as early as the eight-cell stage, and all of these encode transcription factors.\nOf these seven misregulated targets, five (ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and  [CLS] TCP4) have reported embryonic functions [CLS]  after the preglobular stage (Palatnik et al. 2003; Mallory et al. 2005; Prigge et al. 2005). miR166-mediated regulation of PHB and PHV has also been reported to be important"]]
["seedev_dev_371", [" of both miR156-mediated regulation of SPL transcripts and miR166-mediated regulation\nof HD-ZIPIII transcripts in dcl1 embryos is responsible for the embryonic patterning phenotypes observed. Future characterization of how multiple  [CLS] miRNA/target\ninteractions facilitate embryonic cell differentiation [CLS]  will contribute to a better understanding of how the basic plant body\nplan is established during embryo morphogenesis.\nWe also report previously uncharacterized roles of miR156-mediated SPL gene repression"]]
["seedev_dev_372", [" addition to SPL10 and SPL11 have increased levels as early as the eight-cell stage, and all of these encode transcription factors.\nOf these seven misregulated targets, five (ARF17, CNA,  [CLS] PHB, PHV, and TCP4) have reported embryonic functions [CLS]  after the preglobular stage (Palatnik et al. 2003; Mallory et al. 2005; Prigge et al. 2005). miR166-mediated regulation of PHB and PHV has also been reported to be important"]]
["seedev_dev_373", [" and SPL11 promoter activities do increase at the same stages that the morphogenesis-to-maturation-phase transition occurs (Fig. 5). Therefore, at later stages of morphogenesis, miR156 may establish a threshold that  [CLS] SPL10 and SPL11 transcript levels must surpass in order to accumulate and promote maturation-phase gene expression programs [CLS] . Despite the\ncharacterization of hormonal, metabolic, and genetic factors involved in embryo maturation (Nambara and Marion-Poll 2003; Weber et al. 2005; Braybrook and Harada 2008), the regulatory mechanisms that"]]
["seedev_dev_374", [" miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors such as ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4. A link between delayed reduction of maternal transcripts and the  [CLS] morphogenesis phenotypes observed in MZdicer embryos [CLS]  awaits\nexperimental confirmation. The same is true for the precocious expression of maturation transcripts and the patterning phenotypes\nobserved in dcl1 embryos, although SPL10 and SPL11 have been experimentally", " of other miRNA targets is required for the dcl1 embryonic phenotypes. Perhaps the loss of both miR156-mediated regulation of SPL transcripts and miR166-mediated regulation\nof HD-ZIPIII transcripts in dcl1  [CLS] embryos is responsible for the embryonic patterning [CLS]  phenotypes observed. Future characterization of how multiple miRNA/target\ninteractions facilitate embryonic cell differentiation will contribute to a better understanding of how the basic plant body\nplan is established during", " are intolerant of desiccation and show defects in the\nexpression of some, but not all, maturation-specific genes ([28],\n[53]\u00a0and\u00a0[39]). LEC1 is also involved in inhibiting premature germination. lec1\nmutant  [CLS] embryos exhibit morphological and molecular characteristics of\nboth embryogenesis [CLS]  and postgerminative seedling development, showing\nthat aspects of both programs can occur simultaneously (Meinke 1992Meinke, 1992, 1994; West et al. 1994). LEC1 plays a role in the specification of", " are intolerant of desiccation and show defects in the\nexpression of some, but not all, maturation-specific genes ([28],\n[53]\u00a0and\u00a0[39]). LEC1 is also involved in inhibiting premature germination. lec1\nmutant  [CLS] embryos exhibit morphological and molecular characteristics of\nboth embryogenesis and postgerminative seedling development [CLS] , showing\nthat aspects of both programs can occur simultaneously (Meinke 1992Meinke, 1992, 1994; West et al. 1994). LEC1 plays a role in the specification of embryonic organ identity as"]]
["seedev_dev_375", [" promoter activities do increase at the same stages that the morphogenesis-to-maturation-phase transition occurs (Fig. 5). Therefore, at later stages of morphogenesis, miR156 may establish a threshold that SPL10 and  [CLS] SPL11 transcript levels must surpass in order to accumulate and promote maturation-phase gene expression programs [CLS] . Despite the\ncharacterization of hormonal, metabolic, and genetic factors involved in embryo maturation (Nambara and Marion-Poll 2003; Weber et al. 2005; Braybrook and Harada 2008), the regulatory mechanisms that"]]
["seedev_dev_376", [" expression of miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional plant miRNAs\u2014including  [CLS] miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors [CLS]  such as ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4. A link between delayed reduction of maternal transcripts and the morphogenesis phenotypes observed in MZdicer embryos awaits\nexperimental confirmation. The same"]]
["seedev_dev_377", [" embryos transition to a maturation phase, when they\naccumulate storage proteins, undergo desiccation tolerance, and prepare to enter into a state of dormancy prior to germination.\nWe found that  [CLS] miR156-mediated regulation of SPL10 and SPL11 prevents the transcription factor products of these genes from prematurely inducing seed maturation genes before the embryo\nhas formed [CLS] . To the extent that this regulation forestalls the morphogenesis-to-maturation-phase transition, this newly identified\nrole for miR156-mediated repression of SPL genes resembles that observed for vegetative-, reproductive-, and meristem identity-phase"]]
["seedev_dev_378", [" ultimately contributes to precocious differentiation and subsequent loss of developmental potential in preglobular\ncell types.\nThe two transcription factor genes that were most derepressed in eight-cell dcl1 embryos were  [CLS] miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11 [CLS] , for which transcripts were up-regulated \u2265150-fold (\u2265600-fold if only the homozygous mutant embryos contributed to the increase).\nThese two genes were redundantly required for the embryonic patterning defects observed", " embryos transition to a maturation phase, when they\naccumulate storage proteins, undergo desiccation tolerance, and prepare to enter into a state of dormancy prior to germination.\nWe found that  [CLS] miR156-mediated regulation of SPL10 [CLS]  and SPL11 prevents the transcription factor products of these genes from prematurely inducing seed maturation genes before the embryo\nhas formed. To the extent that this regulation forestalls the", " facilitate embryonic cell differentiation will contribute to a better understanding of how the basic plant body\nplan is established during embryo morphogenesis.\nWe also report previously uncharacterized roles of  [CLS] miR156-mediated SPL [CLS]  gene repression during embryogenesis. After morphogenesis, seed plant embryos transition to a maturation phase, when they\naccumulate storage proteins, undergo desiccation tolerance, and prepare to enter into a state", " requirement of these targets for the patterning defects observed in dcl1 embryos. Perhaps the premature induction of maturation-phase genes arrests morphogenesis before it is complete.\nLater in development, the  [CLS] miR156-mediated repression of SPL10 and SPL11 [CLS]  must presumably be overcome in order for the embryo to undergo the morphogenesis-to-maturation transition. Although miR156\nlevels do not appear to decrease at later stages of morphogenesis (Fig. 3A),", " not suppress dcl1-null embryonic phenotypes (Grigg et al. 2009), suggesting that the misregulation of other miRNA targets is required for the dcl1 embryonic phenotypes. Perhaps the loss of both  [CLS] miR156-mediated regulation of SPL [CLS]  transcripts and miR166-mediated regulation\nof HD-ZIPIII transcripts in dcl1 embryos is responsible for the embryonic patterning phenotypes observed. Future characterization of how multiple miRNA/target\ninteractions facilitate embryonic cell differentiation", " ultimately contributes to precocious differentiation and subsequent loss of developmental potential in preglobular\ncell types.\nThe two transcription factor genes that were most derepressed in eight-cell dcl1 embryos were  [CLS] miR156 targets SPL10 [CLS]  and SPL11, for which transcripts were up-regulated \u2265150-fold (\u2265600-fold if only the homozygous mutant embryos contributed to the increase).\nThese two genes were redundantly required for the embryonic patterning", " requirement of these targets for the patterning defects observed in dcl1 embryos. Perhaps the premature induction of maturation-phase genes arrests morphogenesis before it is complete.\nLater in development, the  [CLS] miR156-mediated repression of SPL10 [CLS]  and SPL11 must presumably be overcome in order for the embryo to undergo the morphogenesis-to-maturation transition. Although miR156\nlevels do not appear to decrease at later stages of morphogenesis", " embryos transition to a maturation phase, when they\naccumulate storage proteins, undergo desiccation tolerance, and prepare to enter into a state of dormancy prior to germination.\nWe found that  [CLS] miR156-mediated regulation of SPL10 and SPL11 [CLS]  prevents the transcription factor products of these genes from prematurely inducing seed maturation genes before the embryo\nhas formed. To the extent that this regulation forestalls the morphogenesis-to-maturation-phase transition,"]]
["seedev_dev_379", [" of these genes from prematurely inducing seed maturation genes before the embryo\nhas formed. To the extent that this regulation forestalls the morphogenesis-to-maturation-phase transition, this newly identified\nrole for  [CLS] miR156-mediated repression of SPL [CLS]  genes resembles that observed for vegetative-, reproductive-, and meristem identity-phase transitions during post-embryonic\ndevelopment (Wu and Poethig 2006; Gandikota et al. 2007; Schwarz et al. 2008; Wang et al."]]
["seedev_dev_380", [" which suggests that the misregulation of additional targets contributes to the patterning defects observed. Consistent\nwith this idea, at least seven miRNA target transcripts in addition to SPL10 and  [CLS] SPL11 have increased levels as early as the eight-cell stage [CLS] , and all of these encode transcription factors.\nOf these seven misregulated targets, five (ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4) have reported embryonic functions after the preglobular stage (Palatnik et", " dcl1 embryos, which suggests that the misregulation of additional targets contributes to the patterning defects observed. Consistent\nwith this idea, at least seven miRNA target transcripts in addition to  [CLS] SPL10 and SPL11 have increased levels as early as the eight-cell stage [CLS] , and all of these encode transcription factors.\nOf these seven misregulated targets, five (ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4) have reported embryonic functions after the preglobular stage (Palatnik et"]]
["seedev_dev_381", [" misregulated targets, five (ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4) have reported embryonic functions after the preglobular stage (Palatnik et al. 2003; Mallory et al. 2005; Prigge et al. 2005).  [CLS] miR166-mediated regulation of PHB [CLS]  and PHV has also been reported to be important during early embryonic patterning (Grigg et al. 2009). However, phb phv double mutants do not suppress dcl1-null embryonic phenotypes (Grigg", " misregulated targets, five (ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4) have reported embryonic functions after the preglobular stage (Palatnik et al. 2003; Mallory et al. 2005; Prigge et al. 2005).  [CLS] miR166-mediated regulation of PHB and PHV [CLS]  has also been reported to be important during early embryonic patterning (Grigg et al. 2009). However, phb phv double mutants do not suppress dcl1-null embryonic phenotypes (Grigg et al."]]
["seedev_dev_382", [" et al. 2009), suggesting that the misregulation of other miRNA targets is required for the dcl1 embryonic phenotypes. Perhaps the loss of both miR156-mediated regulation of SPL transcripts and  [CLS] miR166-mediated regulation\nof HD-ZIPIII [CLS]  transcripts in dcl1 embryos is responsible for the embryonic patterning phenotypes observed. Future characterization of how multiple miRNA/target\ninteractions facilitate embryonic cell differentiation will contribute to a better understanding"]]
["seedev_dev_383", [" before it is complete.\nLater in development, the miR156-mediated repression of SPL10 and SPL11 must presumably be overcome in order for the embryo to undergo the morphogenesis-to-maturation transition. Although  [CLS] miR156\nlevels do not appear to decrease at later stages of morphogenesis [CLS]  (Fig. 3A), SPL10 and SPL11 promoter activities do increase at the same stages that the morphogenesis-to-maturation-phase transition occurs (Fig. 5). Therefore, at later stages of morphogenesis, miR156 may establish"]]
["seedev_dev_384", [" in dcl1 embryos (Table 1; Fig. 4A,D). The ability to suppress such a pleiotropic phenotype by knocking out/down only two miRNA targets was surprising when considering\nthat dozens of  [CLS] miRNA targets were derepressed in dcl1 embryos [CLS] . However, miR156-resistant SPL10 and SPL11 transgenes did not phenocopy dcl1 embryos, which suggests that the misregulation of additional targets contributes to the patterning defects observed. Consistent\nwith this idea,", " SPL10, SPL11, ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4), miRNAs maintain the potential of preglobular cells to generate diverse cell types at the subsequent globular stages. Since\nthe reduction of  [CLS] WOX2 transcripts in dcl1 eight-cell embryos [CLS]  was the first detectable differentiation defect, and homeobox genes related to WOX2 have been implicated in maintaining stem cells during post-embryonic development (Laux et al. 1996; Mayer et al.", " cells during post-embryonic development (Laux et al. 1996; Mayer et al. 1998; Wu et al. 2005), we speculate that premature expression of miRNA targets leads to the reduction of  [CLS] WOX2 transcripts in dcl1 embryos [CLS]  and ultimately contributes to precocious differentiation and subsequent loss of developmental potential in preglobular\ncell types.\nThe two transcription factor genes that were most derepressed in eight-cell dcl1 embryos"]]
["seedev_dev_385", [" and SPL11 transgenes did not phenocopy dcl1 embryos, which suggests that the misregulation of additional targets contributes to the patterning defects observed. Consistent\nwith this idea, at least seven  [CLS] miRNA target transcripts in addition to SPL10 and SPL11 have increased levels as early as the eight-cell stage [CLS] , and all of these encode transcription factors.\nOf these seven misregulated targets, five (ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4) have reported embryonic functions after the preglobular stage (Palatnik et"]]
["seedev_dev_386", [" stages of morphogenesis (Fig. 3A), SPL10 and SPL11 promoter activities do increase at the same stages that the morphogenesis-to-maturation-phase transition occurs (Fig. 5). Therefore, at later stages of morphogenesis,  [CLS] miR156 may establish a threshold that SPL10 and SPL11 transcript [CLS]  levels must surpass in order to accumulate and promote maturation-phase gene expression programs. Despite the\ncharacterization of hormonal, metabolic, and genetic factors involved in embryo maturation (Nambara and Marion-Poll", " stages of morphogenesis (Fig. 3A), SPL10 and SPL11 promoter activities do increase at the same stages that the morphogenesis-to-maturation-phase transition occurs (Fig. 5). Therefore, at later stages of morphogenesis,  [CLS] miR156 may establish a threshold that SPL10 and SPL11 transcript [CLS]  levels must surpass in order to accumulate and promote maturation-phase gene expression programs. Despite the\ncharacterization of hormonal, metabolic, and genetic factors involved in embryo maturation (Nambara and Marion-Poll"]]
["seedev_dev_387", [" genes related to WOX2 have been implicated in maintaining stem cells during post-embryonic development (Laux et al. 1996; Mayer et al. 1998; Wu et al. 2005), we speculate that  [CLS] premature expression of miRNA targets leads to the reduction of WOX2 transcripts [CLS]  in dcl1 embryos and ultimately contributes to precocious differentiation and subsequent loss of developmental potential in preglobular\ncell types.\nThe two transcription factor genes that were most derepressed in"]]
["seedev_dev_388", [" which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of  [CLS] differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors such as ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV [CLS] , and TCP4. A link between delayed reduction of maternal transcripts and the morphogenesis phenotypes observed in MZdicer embryos awaits\nexperimental confirmation. The same is true for the precocious expression", " defects in both patterning and maturation gene expression.\nOne of the earliest perceptible roles of plant miRNAs is to repress transcription factors (Fig. 2C). We propose that, by repressing  [CLS] differentiation-promoting transcription factors (including SPL10, SPL11, ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV [CLS] , and TCP4), miRNAs maintain the potential of preglobular cells to generate diverse cell types at the subsequent globular stages. Since\nthe reduction of WOX2 transcripts in dcl1 eight-cell embryos"]]
["seedev_dev_389", [" [CLS] premature expression of miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11 [CLS] , which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of", " defects in both patterning and maturation gene expression.\nOne of the earliest perceptible roles of plant miRNAs is to repress transcription factors (Fig. 2C). We propose that, by repressing  [CLS] differentiation-promoting transcription factors (including SPL10, SPL11 [CLS] , ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4), miRNAs maintain the potential of preglobular cells to generate diverse cell types at the subsequent globular stages. Since\nthe reduction of WOX2 transcripts"]]
["seedev_dev_390", [" [CLS] embryos lack miR156 [CLS]  and exhibit premature expression of miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat"]]
["seedev_dev_391", [" which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of  [CLS] differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors such as ARF17 [CLS] , CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4. A link between delayed reduction of maternal transcripts and the morphogenesis phenotypes observed in MZdicer embryos awaits\nexperimental confirmation. The same is true for", " defects in both patterning and maturation gene expression.\nOne of the earliest perceptible roles of plant miRNAs is to repress transcription factors (Fig. 2C). We propose that, by repressing  [CLS] differentiation-promoting transcription factors (including SPL10, SPL11, ARF17 [CLS] , CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4), miRNAs maintain the potential of preglobular cells to generate diverse cell types at the subsequent globular stages. Since\nthe reduction of WOX2 transcripts in"]]
["seedev_dev_392", [" defects in both patterning and maturation gene expression.\nOne of the earliest perceptible roles of plant miRNAs is to repress transcription factors (Fig. 2C). We propose that, by repressing  [CLS] differentiation-promoting transcription factors (including SPL10, SPL11, ARF17, CNA, PHB [CLS] , PHV, and TCP4), miRNAs maintain the potential of preglobular cells to generate diverse cell types at the subsequent globular stages. Since\nthe reduction of WOX2 transcripts in dcl1 eight-cell", " which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of  [CLS] differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors such as ARF17, CNA, PHB [CLS] , PHV, and TCP4. A link between delayed reduction of maternal transcripts and the morphogenesis phenotypes observed in MZdicer embryos awaits\nexperimental confirmation. The same is true for the precocious"]]
["seedev_dev_393", [" how the basic plant body\nplan is established during embryo morphogenesis.\nWe also report previously uncharacterized roles of miR156-mediated SPL gene repression during embryogenesis. After morphogenesis, seed plant embryos  [CLS] transition to a maturation phase, when they\naccumulate storage proteins [CLS] , undergo desiccation tolerance, and prepare to enter into a state of dormancy prior to germination.\nWe found that miR156-mediated regulation of SPL10 and SPL11 prevents the transcription factor products"]]
["seedev_dev_394", [" better understanding of how the basic plant body\nplan is established during embryo morphogenesis.\nWe also report previously uncharacterized roles of miR156-mediated SPL gene repression during embryogenesis. After morphogenesis,  [CLS] seed plant [CLS]  embryos transition to a maturation phase, when they\naccumulate storage proteins, undergo desiccation tolerance, and prepare to enter into a state of dormancy prior to germination.\nWe found that"]]
["seedev_dev_395", [" [CLS] premature expression of miR156 targets SPL10 [CLS]  and SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall", " defects in both patterning and maturation gene expression.\nOne of the earliest perceptible roles of plant miRNAs is to repress transcription factors (Fig. 2C). We propose that, by repressing  [CLS] differentiation-promoting transcription factors (including SPL10 [CLS] , SPL11, ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4), miRNAs maintain the potential of preglobular cells to generate diverse cell types at the subsequent globular stages. Since\nthe reduction of WOX2"]]
["seedev_dev_396", [" which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of  [CLS] differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors such as ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4 [CLS] . A link between delayed reduction of maternal transcripts and the morphogenesis phenotypes observed in MZdicer embryos awaits\nexperimental confirmation. The same is true for the precocious expression of maturation", " defects in both patterning and maturation gene expression.\nOne of the earliest perceptible roles of plant miRNAs is to repress transcription factors (Fig. 2C). We propose that, by repressing  [CLS] differentiation-promoting transcription factors (including SPL10, SPL11, ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4 [CLS] ), miRNAs maintain the potential of preglobular cells to generate diverse cell types at the subsequent globular stages. Since\nthe reduction of WOX2 transcripts in dcl1 eight-cell embryos was the"]]
["seedev_dev_397", [" how the basic plant body\nplan is established during embryo morphogenesis.\nWe also report previously uncharacterized roles of miR156-mediated SPL gene repression during embryogenesis. After morphogenesis, seed plant embryos  [CLS] transition to a maturation phase, when they\naccumulate storage proteins, undergo desiccation tolerance [CLS] , and prepare to enter into a state of dormancy prior to germination.\nWe found that miR156-mediated regulation of SPL10 and SPL11 prevents the transcription factor products of these genes"]]
["seedev_dev_398", [" defects in both patterning and maturation gene expression.\nOne of the earliest perceptible roles of plant miRNAs is to repress transcription factors (Fig. 2C). We propose that, by repressing  [CLS] differentiation-promoting transcription factors (including SPL10, SPL11, ARF17, CNA [CLS] , PHB, PHV, and TCP4), miRNAs maintain the potential of preglobular cells to generate diverse cell types at the subsequent globular stages. Since\nthe reduction of WOX2 transcripts in dcl1", " which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of  [CLS] differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors such as ARF17, CNA [CLS] , PHB, PHV, and TCP4. A link between delayed reduction of maternal transcripts and the morphogenesis phenotypes observed in MZdicer embryos awaits\nexperimental confirmation. The same is true for the"]]
["seedev_dev_399", [" premature expression of miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional plant  [CLS] miRNAs\u2014including miR160 [CLS] , miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors such as ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4. A link between delayed reduction of maternal transcripts and the morphogenesis phenotypes"]]
["seedev_dev_400", [" premature expression of miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional plant  [CLS] miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166 [CLS] , and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors such as ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4. A link between delayed reduction of maternal transcripts and the morphogenesis phenotypes observed"]]
["seedev_dev_401", [" premature expression of miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional plant  [CLS] miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319 [CLS] \u2014also forestall expression of differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors such as ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4. A link between delayed reduction of maternal transcripts and the morphogenesis phenotypes observed in MZdicer"]]
["seedev_dev_402", [" understanding of how the basic plant body\nplan is established during embryo morphogenesis.\nWe also report previously uncharacterized roles of miR156-mediated SPL gene repression during embryogenesis. After morphogenesis, seed  [CLS] plant embryos transition to a maturation phase, when they\naccumulate storage proteins [CLS] , undergo desiccation tolerance, and prepare to enter into a state of dormancy prior to germination.\nWe found that miR156-mediated regulation of SPL10 and SPL11 prevents the transcription factor products"]]
["seedev_dev_403", [" understanding of how the basic plant body\nplan is established during embryo morphogenesis.\nWe also report previously uncharacterized roles of miR156-mediated SPL gene repression during embryogenesis. After morphogenesis, seed  [CLS] plant embryos transition to a maturation phase, when they\naccumulate storage proteins, undergo desiccation tolerance [CLS] , and prepare to enter into a state of dormancy prior to germination.\nWe found that miR156-mediated regulation of SPL10 and SPL11 prevents the transcription factor products of these genes"]]
["seedev_dev_404", [" of how the basic plant body\nplan is established during embryo morphogenesis.\nWe also report previously uncharacterized roles of miR156-mediated SPL gene repression during embryogenesis. After morphogenesis, seed plant  [CLS] embryos transition to a maturation phase, when they\naccumulate storage proteins [CLS] , undergo desiccation tolerance, and prepare to enter into a state of dormancy prior to germination.\nWe found that miR156-mediated regulation of SPL10 and SPL11 prevents the transcription factor products"]]
["seedev_dev_405", [" of how the basic plant body\nplan is established during embryo morphogenesis.\nWe also report previously uncharacterized roles of miR156-mediated SPL gene repression during embryogenesis. After morphogenesis, seed plant  [CLS] embryos transition to a maturation phase, when they\naccumulate storage proteins, undergo desiccation tolerance [CLS] , and prepare to enter into a state of dormancy prior to germination.\nWe found that miR156-mediated regulation of SPL10 and SPL11 prevents the transcription factor products of these genes"]]
["seedev_dev_406", [" [CLS] dcl1 mutant embryos lack miR156 [CLS]  and exhibit premature expression of miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat", " not suppress dcl1-null embryonic phenotypes (Grigg et al. 2009), suggesting that the misregulation of other miRNA targets is required for the dcl1 embryonic phenotypes. Perhaps the loss of both  [CLS] miR156-mediated regulation of SPL transcripts and miR166-mediated regulation\nof HD-ZIPIII transcripts in dcl1 [CLS]  embryos is responsible for the embryonic patterning phenotypes observed. Future characterization of how multiple miRNA/target\ninteractions facilitate embryonic cell differentiation will contribute to a better understanding of how the", " dcl1 embryos and ultimately contributes to precocious differentiation and subsequent loss of developmental potential in preglobular\ncell types.\nThe two transcription factor genes that were most derepressed in eight-cell  [CLS] dcl1 embryos were miR156 [CLS]  targets SPL10 and SPL11, for which transcripts were up-regulated \u2265150-fold (\u2265600-fold if only the homozygous mutant embryos contributed to the increase).\nThese two genes were redundantly required for the"]]
["seedev_dev_407", [" exhibit premature expression of miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional  [CLS] plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors such as ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV [CLS] , and TCP4. A link between delayed reduction of maternal transcripts and the morphogenesis phenotypes observed in MZdicer embryos awaits\nexperimental confirmation. The same is true for the precocious expression"]]
["seedev_dev_408", [" exhibit premature expression of miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional  [CLS] plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors such as ARF17 [CLS] , CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4. A link between delayed reduction of maternal transcripts and the morphogenesis phenotypes observed in MZdicer embryos awaits\nexperimental confirmation. The same is true for"]]
["seedev_dev_409", [" exhibit premature expression of miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional  [CLS] plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors such as ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4 [CLS] . A link between delayed reduction of maternal transcripts and the morphogenesis phenotypes observed in MZdicer embryos awaits\nexperimental confirmation. The same is true for the precocious expression of maturation"]]
["seedev_dev_410", [" exhibit premature expression of miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional  [CLS] plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors such as ARF17, CNA, PHB [CLS] , PHV, and TCP4. A link between delayed reduction of maternal transcripts and the morphogenesis phenotypes observed in MZdicer embryos awaits\nexperimental confirmation. The same is true for the precocious"]]
["seedev_dev_411", [" exhibit premature expression of miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional  [CLS] plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors such as ARF17, CNA [CLS] , PHB, PHV, and TCP4. A link between delayed reduction of maternal transcripts and the morphogenesis phenotypes observed in MZdicer embryos awaits\nexperimental confirmation. The same is true for the"]]
["seedev_dev_412", [" [CLS] dcl1 mutant embryos lack miR156 and exhibit premature expression of miR156 targets [CLS]  SPL10 and SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also"]]
["seedev_dev_413", [" exhibit premature expression of miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional  [CLS] plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors [CLS]  such as ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4. A link between delayed reduction of maternal transcripts and the morphogenesis phenotypes observed in MZdicer embryos awaits\nexperimental confirmation. The same"]]
["seedev_dev_414", [" exhibit premature expression of miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional  [CLS] plant miRNAs [CLS] \u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors such as ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4. A link between delayed reduction of maternal transcripts and the morphogenesis"]]
["seedev_dev_415", [" differentiation and subsequent loss of developmental potential in preglobular\ncell types.\nThe two transcription factor genes that were most derepressed in eight-cell dcl1 embryos were miR156 targets SPL10 and  [CLS] SPL11, for which transcripts were up-regulated \u2265150-fold (\u2265600-fold if only the homozygous mutant embryos contributed to the increase).\nThese two genes were redundantly required for the embryonic patterning defects observed in dcl1 [CLS]  embryos (Table 1; Fig. 4A,D). The ability to suppress such a pleiotropic phenotype by knocking out/down only two miRNA targets was surprising when considering\nthat dozens of miRNA targets", " [CLS] dcl1 mutant embryos lack miR156 and exhibit premature expression of miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11 [CLS] , which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of"]]
["seedev_dev_416", [" exhibit premature expression of miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional  [CLS] plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166 [CLS] , and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors such as ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4. A link between delayed reduction of maternal transcripts and the morphogenesis phenotypes observed", " et al. 2009), suggesting that the misregulation of other miRNA targets is required for the dcl1 embryonic phenotypes. Perhaps the loss of both miR156-mediated regulation of SPL transcripts and  [CLS] miR166-mediated regulation\nof HD-ZIPIII transcripts in dcl1 [CLS]  embryos is responsible for the embryonic patterning phenotypes observed. Future characterization of how multiple miRNA/target\ninteractions facilitate embryonic cell differentiation will contribute to a better understanding of how the"]]
["seedev_dev_417", [" exhibit premature expression of miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional  [CLS] plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319 [CLS] \u2014also forestall expression of differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors such as ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4. A link between delayed reduction of maternal transcripts and the morphogenesis phenotypes observed in MZdicer"]]
["seedev_dev_418", [" of both miR156-mediated regulation of SPL transcripts and miR166-mediated regulation\nof HD-ZIPIII transcripts in dcl1 embryos is responsible for the embryonic patterning phenotypes observed. Future characterization of how multiple  [CLS] miRNA/target\ninteractions facilitate embryonic cell differentiation will contribute to a better understanding of how the basic plant [CLS]  body\nplan is established during embryo morphogenesis.\nWe also report previously uncharacterized roles of miR156-mediated SPL gene repression during embryogenesis. After morphogenesis, seed plant embryos transition to a maturation"]]
["seedev_dev_419", [" exhibit premature expression of miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional  [CLS] plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160 [CLS] , miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors such as ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4. A link between delayed reduction of maternal transcripts and the morphogenesis phenotypes"]]
["seedev_dev_420", [" to precocious differentiation and subsequent loss of developmental potential in preglobular\ncell types.\nThe two transcription factor genes that were most derepressed in eight-cell dcl1 embryos were miR156 targets  [CLS] SPL10 and SPL11, for which transcripts were up-regulated \u2265150-fold (\u2265600-fold if only the homozygous mutant embryos contributed to the increase).\nThese two genes were redundantly required for the embryonic patterning defects observed in dcl1 [CLS]  embryos (Table 1; Fig. 4A,D). The ability to suppress such a pleiotropic phenotype by knocking out/down only two miRNA targets was surprising when considering\nthat dozens of miRNA targets", " [CLS] dcl1 mutant embryos lack miR156 and exhibit premature expression of miR156 targets SPL10 [CLS]  and SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall"]]
["seedev_dev_421", [" double mutants do not suppress dcl1-null embryonic phenotypes (Grigg et al. 2009), suggesting that the misregulation of other miRNA targets is required for the dcl1 embryonic phenotypes. Perhaps the  [CLS] loss of both miR156-mediated regulation of SPL transcripts and miR166-mediated regulation\nof HD-ZIPIII transcripts in dcl1 [CLS]  embryos is responsible for the embryonic patterning phenotypes observed. Future characterization of how multiple miRNA/target\ninteractions facilitate embryonic cell differentiation will contribute to a better understanding of how the"]]
["seedev_dev_422", [" double mutants do not suppress dcl1-null embryonic phenotypes (Grigg et al. 2009), suggesting that the misregulation of other miRNA targets is required for the dcl1 embryonic phenotypes. Perhaps the  [CLS] loss of both miR156-mediated regulation of SPL transcripts and miR166-mediated regulation\nof HD-ZIPIII transcripts in dcl1 [CLS]  embryos is responsible for the embryonic patterning phenotypes observed. Future characterization of how multiple miRNA/target\ninteractions facilitate embryonic cell differentiation will contribute to a better understanding of how the"]]
["seedev_dev_423", [" genes related to WOX2 have been implicated in maintaining stem cells during post-embryonic development (Laux et al. 1996; Mayer et al. 1998; Wu et al. 2005), we speculate that  [CLS] premature expression of miRNA targets leads to the reduction of WOX2 transcripts in dcl1 [CLS]  embryos and ultimately contributes to precocious differentiation and subsequent loss of developmental potential in preglobular\ncell types.\nThe two transcription factor genes that were most derepressed in eight-cell dcl1"]]
["seedev_dev_424", [" differentiation and subsequent loss of developmental potential in preglobular\ncell types.\nThe two transcription factor genes that were most derepressed in eight-cell dcl1 embryos were miR156 targets SPL10 and  [CLS] SPL11, for which transcripts were up-regulated \u2265150-fold (\u2265600-fold if only the homozygous mutant embryos contributed to the increase).\nThese two genes were redundantly required for the embryonic patterning defects observed in dcl1 embryos [CLS]  (Table 1; Fig. 4A,D). The ability to suppress such a pleiotropic phenotype by knocking out/down only two miRNA targets was surprising when considering\nthat dozens of miRNA targets were", " to precocious differentiation and subsequent loss of developmental potential in preglobular\ncell types.\nThe two transcription factor genes that were most derepressed in eight-cell dcl1 embryos were miR156 targets  [CLS] SPL10 and SPL11, for which transcripts were up-regulated \u2265150-fold (\u2265600-fold if only the homozygous mutant embryos contributed to the increase).\nThese two genes were redundantly required for the embryonic patterning defects observed in dcl1 embryos [CLS]  (Table 1; Fig. 4A,D). The ability to suppress such a pleiotropic phenotype by knocking out/down only two miRNA targets was surprising when considering\nthat dozens of miRNA targets were", " [CLS] embryos lack miR156 and exhibit premature expression of miR156 targets SPL10 [CLS]  and SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall", " [CLS] embryos lack miR156 and exhibit premature expression of miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11 [CLS] , which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of", " embryos and ultimately contributes to precocious differentiation and subsequent loss of developmental potential in preglobular\ncell types.\nThe two transcription factor genes that were most derepressed in eight-cell dcl1  [CLS] embryos were miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11 [CLS] , for which transcripts were up-regulated \u2265150-fold (\u2265600-fold if only the homozygous mutant embryos contributed to the increase).\nThese two genes were redundantly required for the embryonic patterning defects observed", " embryonic phenotypes (Grigg et al. 2009), suggesting that the misregulation of other miRNA targets is required for the dcl1 embryonic phenotypes. Perhaps the loss of both miR156-mediated regulation of  [CLS] SPL transcripts and miR166-mediated regulation\nof HD-ZIPIII transcripts in dcl1 embryos [CLS]  is responsible for the embryonic patterning phenotypes observed. Future characterization of how multiple miRNA/target\ninteractions facilitate embryonic cell differentiation will contribute to a better understanding of how the basic", " embryos and ultimately contributes to precocious differentiation and subsequent loss of developmental potential in preglobular\ncell types.\nThe two transcription factor genes that were most derepressed in eight-cell dcl1  [CLS] embryos were miR156 targets SPL10 [CLS]  and SPL11, for which transcripts were up-regulated \u2265150-fold (\u2265600-fold if only the homozygous mutant embryos contributed to the increase).\nThese two genes were redundantly required for the embryonic patterning", " [CLS] pAt2S3:GFP, something not seen in either fus3-3 or lec2-1 embryos [CLS]  (Meinke et al., 1994; Kroj et al., 2003; To et al., 2006), suggesting that after that stage, other miRNA-regulated factors can compensate for the absence of LEC2 or FUS3.", " [CLS] embryos have high levels of chlorophyll and pAt2S3:GFP [CLS] , something not seen in either fus3-3 or lec2-1 embryos (Meinke et al., 1994; Kroj et al., 2003; To et al., 2006), suggesting that after that stage, other miRNA-regulated factors"]]
["seedev_dev_425", [" double mutants do not suppress dcl1-null embryonic phenotypes (Grigg et al. 2009), suggesting that the misregulation of other miRNA targets is required for the dcl1 embryonic phenotypes. Perhaps the  [CLS] loss of both miR156-mediated regulation of SPL transcripts and miR166-mediated regulation\nof HD-ZIPIII transcripts in dcl1 embryos [CLS]  is responsible for the embryonic patterning phenotypes observed. Future characterization of how multiple miRNA/target\ninteractions facilitate embryonic cell differentiation will contribute to a better understanding of how the basic"]]
["seedev_dev_426", [" double mutants do not suppress dcl1-null embryonic phenotypes (Grigg et al. 2009), suggesting that the misregulation of other miRNA targets is required for the dcl1 embryonic phenotypes. Perhaps the  [CLS] loss of both miR156-mediated regulation of SPL transcripts and miR166-mediated regulation\nof HD-ZIPIII transcripts in dcl1 embryos [CLS]  is responsible for the embryonic patterning phenotypes observed. Future characterization of how multiple miRNA/target\ninteractions facilitate embryonic cell differentiation will contribute to a better understanding of how the basic"]]
["seedev_dev_427", [" genes related to WOX2 have been implicated in maintaining stem cells during post-embryonic development (Laux et al. 1996; Mayer et al. 1998; Wu et al. 2005), we speculate that  [CLS] premature expression of miRNA targets leads to the reduction of WOX2 transcripts in dcl1 embryos [CLS]  and ultimately contributes to precocious differentiation and subsequent loss of developmental potential in preglobular\ncell types.\nThe two transcription factor genes that were most derepressed in eight-cell dcl1 embryos"]]
["seedev_dev_428", [" transcripts in addition to SPL10 and SPL11 have increased levels as early as the eight-cell stage, and all of these encode transcription factors.\nOf these seven misregulated targets, five ( [CLS] ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4) have reported embryonic functions after the preglobular stage [CLS]  (Palatnik et al. 2003; Mallory et al. 2005; Prigge et al. 2005). miR166-mediated regulation of PHB and PHV has also been reported to be important during early embryonic patterning", " in addition to SPL10 and SPL11 have increased levels as early as the eight-cell stage, and all of these encode transcription factors.\nOf these seven misregulated targets, five (ARF17,  [CLS] CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4) have reported embryonic functions after the preglobular stage [CLS]  (Palatnik et al. 2003; Mallory et al. 2005; Prigge et al. 2005). miR166-mediated regulation of PHB and PHV has also been reported to be important during early embryonic patterning", " to SPL10 and SPL11 have increased levels as early as the eight-cell stage, and all of these encode transcription factors.\nOf these seven misregulated targets, five (ARF17, CNA, PHB,  [CLS] PHV, and TCP4) have reported embryonic functions after the preglobular stage [CLS]  (Palatnik et al. 2003; Mallory et al. 2005; Prigge et al. 2005). miR166-mediated regulation of PHB and PHV has also been reported to be important during early embryonic patterning", " and SPL11 have increased levels as early as the eight-cell stage, and all of these encode transcription factors.\nOf these seven misregulated targets, five (ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and  [CLS] TCP4) have reported embryonic functions after the preglobular stage [CLS]  (Palatnik et al. 2003; Mallory et al. 2005; Prigge et al. 2005). miR166-mediated regulation of PHB and PHV has also been reported to be important during early embryonic patterning", " addition to SPL10 and SPL11 have increased levels as early as the eight-cell stage, and all of these encode transcription factors.\nOf these seven misregulated targets, five (ARF17, CNA,  [CLS] PHB, PHV, and TCP4) have reported embryonic functions after the preglobular stage [CLS]  (Palatnik et al. 2003; Mallory et al. 2005; Prigge et al. 2005). miR166-mediated regulation of PHB and PHV has also been reported to be important during early embryonic patterning"]]
["seedev_dev_429", [" CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4), miRNAs maintain the potential of preglobular cells to generate diverse cell types at the subsequent globular stages. Since\nthe reduction of WOX2 transcripts in  [CLS] dcl1 eight-cell embryos was the first detectable differentiation defect [CLS] , and homeobox genes related to WOX2 have been implicated in maintaining stem cells during post-embryonic development (Laux et al. 1996; Mayer et al. 1998; Wu et al. 2005), we", " development (Laux et al. 1996; Mayer et al. 1998; Wu et al. 2005), we speculate that premature expression of miRNA targets leads to the reduction of WOX2 transcripts in  [CLS] dcl1 embryos and ultimately contributes to precocious differentiation and subsequent loss of developmental potential in preglobular\ncell types [CLS] .\nThe two transcription factor genes that were most derepressed in eight-cell dcl1 embryos were miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11, for which transcripts were up-regulated \u2265150-fold (\u2265600-fold if only the", " development (Laux et al. 1996; Mayer et al. 1998; Wu et al. 2005), we speculate that premature expression of miRNA targets leads to the reduction of WOX2 transcripts in  [CLS] dcl1 embryos and ultimately contributes to precocious differentiation [CLS]  and subsequent loss of developmental potential in preglobular\ncell types.\nThe two transcription factor genes that were most derepressed in eight-cell dcl1 embryos were miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11,", " et al. 2009; Wu et al. 2009; Yamaguchi et al. 2009). This role for SPL10 and SPL11 repression might be tied to the requirement of these targets for the  [CLS] patterning defects observed in dcl1 [CLS]  embryos. Perhaps the premature induction of maturation-phase genes arrests morphogenesis before it is complete.\nLater in development, the miR156-mediated repression of SPL10 and SPL11 must presumably be overcome in", " PHB, PHV, and TCP4. A link between delayed reduction of maternal transcripts and the morphogenesis phenotypes observed in MZdicer embryos awaits\nexperimental confirmation. The same is true for the  [CLS] precocious expression of maturation transcripts and the patterning phenotypes\nobserved in dcl1 [CLS]  embryos, although SPL10 and SPL11 have been experimentally linked to defects in both patterning and maturation gene expression.\nOne of the earliest perceptible roles of plant miRNAs is to", " targets SPL10 and SPL11, for which transcripts were up-regulated \u2265150-fold (\u2265600-fold if only the homozygous mutant embryos contributed to the increase).\nThese two genes were redundantly required for the  [CLS] embryonic patterning defects observed in dcl1 [CLS]  embryos (Table 1; Fig. 4A,D). The ability to suppress such a pleiotropic phenotype by knocking out/down only two miRNA targets was surprising when considering\nthat dozens of miRNA targets", " [CLS] dcl1 mutant embryos lack miR156 and exhibit premature expression of miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis [CLS] . We propose\nthat additional plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors such as ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4. A link between delayed reduction", " [CLS] dcl1 mutant embryos lack miR156 and exhibit premature expression of miR156 targets [CLS]  SPL10 and SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also"]]
["seedev_dev_430", [" PHB, PHV, and TCP4), miRNAs maintain the potential of preglobular cells to generate diverse cell types at the subsequent globular stages. Since\nthe reduction of WOX2 transcripts in dcl1  [CLS] eight-cell embryos was the first detectable differentiation defect [CLS] , and homeobox genes related to WOX2 have been implicated in maintaining stem cells during post-embryonic development (Laux et al. 1996; Mayer et al. 1998; Wu et al. 2005), we"]]
["seedev_dev_431", [" misregulation of other miRNA targets is required for the dcl1 embryonic phenotypes. Perhaps the loss of both miR156-mediated regulation of SPL transcripts and miR166-mediated regulation\nof HD-ZIPIII transcripts in  [CLS] dcl1 embryos is responsible for the embryonic patterning [CLS]  phenotypes observed. Future characterization of how multiple miRNA/target\ninteractions facilitate embryonic cell differentiation will contribute to a better understanding of how the basic plant body\nplan is established during"]]
["seedev_dev_432", [" of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors such as ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4. A link between  [CLS] delayed reduction of maternal transcripts and the morphogenesis phenotypes observed in MZdicer [CLS]  embryos awaits\nexperimental confirmation. The same is true for the precocious expression of maturation transcripts and the patterning phenotypes\nobserved in dcl1 embryos, although SPL10 and SPL11 have been"]]
["seedev_dev_433", [" regulation of SPL transcripts and miR166-mediated regulation\nof HD-ZIPIII transcripts in dcl1 embryos is responsible for the embryonic patterning phenotypes observed. Future characterization of how multiple miRNA/target\ninteractions facilitate  [CLS] embryonic cell differentiation will contribute to a better understanding of how the basic plant [CLS]  body\nplan is established during embryo morphogenesis.\nWe also report previously uncharacterized roles of miR156-mediated SPL gene repression during embryogenesis. After morphogenesis, seed plant embryos transition to a maturation"]]
["seedev_dev_434", [" regulation of SPL transcripts and miR166-mediated regulation\nof HD-ZIPIII transcripts in dcl1 embryos is responsible for the embryonic patterning phenotypes observed. Future characterization of how multiple miRNA/target\ninteractions facilitate  [CLS] embryonic cell differentiation will contribute to a better understanding of how the basic plant body\nplan is established during embryo [CLS]  morphogenesis.\nWe also report previously uncharacterized roles of miR156-mediated SPL gene repression during embryogenesis. After morphogenesis, seed plant embryos transition to a maturation phase, when they\naccumulate storage proteins,", " genes play key roles in meristem function, they are\nrequired for meristem formation during both embryogenesis and\npostembryonic development. ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE3 (ABI3), a fourth gene class, encodes an  [CLS] embryo-specific transcription factor that regulates genes expressed during seed maturation [CLS]  ([20]\u00a0and\u00a0[38]).\nHowever, its function is limited to the late stages of embryogenesis.\nAlthough each of these gene classes is essential for embryo development,\nnone appears to act specifically during"]]
["seedev_dev_435", [" increased levels as early as the eight-cell stage, and all of these encode transcription factors.\nOf these seven misregulated targets, five (ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4) have reported  [CLS] embryonic functions after the preglobular stage [CLS]  (Palatnik et al. 2003; Mallory et al. 2005; Prigge et al. 2005). miR166-mediated regulation of PHB and PHV has also been reported to be important during early embryonic patterning"]]
["seedev_dev_436", [" miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors such as ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4. A link between delayed reduction of maternal transcripts and the  [CLS] morphogenesis phenotypes observed in MZdicer [CLS]  embryos awaits\nexperimental confirmation. The same is true for the precocious expression of maturation transcripts and the patterning phenotypes\nobserved in dcl1 embryos, although SPL10 and SPL11 have been"]]
["seedev_dev_437", [" to decrease at later stages of morphogenesis (Fig. 3A), SPL10 and SPL11 promoter activities do increase at the same stages that the morphogenesis-to-maturation-phase transition occurs (Fig. 5). Therefore, at  [CLS] later stages of morphogenesis, miR156 may establish a threshold that SPL10 and SPL11 transcript levels must surpass in order to accumulate and promote maturation-phase gene expression programs [CLS] . Despite the\ncharacterization of hormonal, metabolic, and genetic factors involved in embryo maturation (Nambara and Marion-Poll 2003; Weber et al. 2005; Braybrook and Harada 2008), the regulatory mechanisms that"]]
["seedev_dev_438", [" exhibit premature expression of miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11, which in turn induces precocious expression of genes normally induced during the maturation phase of embryogenesis. We propose\nthat additional  [CLS] plant miRNAs\u2014including miR160, miR166, and miR319\u2014also forestall expression of differentiation-promoting transcription\nfactors [CLS]  such as ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4. A link between delayed reduction of maternal transcripts and the morphogenesis phenotypes observed in MZdicer embryos awaits\nexperimental confirmation. The same"]]
["seedev_dev_439", [" dcl1 embryos and ultimately contributes to precocious differentiation and subsequent loss of developmental potential in preglobular\ncell types.\nThe two transcription factor genes that were most derepressed in eight-cell  [CLS] dcl1 embryos were miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11 [CLS] , for which transcripts were up-regulated \u2265150-fold (\u2265600-fold if only the homozygous mutant embryos contributed to the increase).\nThese two genes were redundantly required for the embryonic patterning defects observed", " embryonic phenotypes (Grigg et al. 2009), suggesting that the misregulation of other miRNA targets is required for the dcl1 embryonic phenotypes. Perhaps the loss of both miR156-mediated regulation of  [CLS] SPL transcripts and miR166-mediated regulation\nof HD-ZIPIII transcripts in dcl1 [CLS]  embryos is responsible for the embryonic patterning phenotypes observed. Future characterization of how multiple miRNA/target\ninteractions facilitate embryonic cell differentiation will contribute to a better understanding of how the", " dcl1 embryos and ultimately contributes to precocious differentiation and subsequent loss of developmental potential in preglobular\ncell types.\nThe two transcription factor genes that were most derepressed in eight-cell  [CLS] dcl1 embryos were miR156 targets SPL10 [CLS]  and SPL11, for which transcripts were up-regulated \u2265150-fold (\u2265600-fold if only the homozygous mutant embryos contributed to the increase).\nThese two genes were redundantly required for the embryonic patterning"]]
["seedev_dev_440", [" in dcl1 embryos and ultimately contributes to precocious differentiation and subsequent loss of developmental potential in preglobular\ncell types.\nThe two transcription factor genes that were most derepressed in  [CLS] eight-cell dcl1 embryos were miR156 targets SPL10 and SPL11 [CLS] , for which transcripts were up-regulated \u2265150-fold (\u2265600-fold if only the homozygous mutant embryos contributed to the increase).\nThese two genes were redundantly required for the embryonic patterning defects observed", " in dcl1 embryos and ultimately contributes to precocious differentiation and subsequent loss of developmental potential in preglobular\ncell types.\nThe two transcription factor genes that were most derepressed in  [CLS] eight-cell dcl1 embryos were miR156 targets SPL10 [CLS]  and SPL11, for which transcripts were up-regulated \u2265150-fold (\u2265600-fold if only the homozygous mutant embryos contributed to the increase).\nThese two genes were redundantly required for the embryonic patterning"]]
["seedev_dev_441", [" embryonic cell differentiation will contribute to a better understanding of how the basic plant body\nplan is established during embryo morphogenesis.\nWe also report previously uncharacterized roles of miR156-mediated  [CLS] SPL gene repression during embryogenesis [CLS] . After morphogenesis, seed plant embryos transition to a maturation phase, when they\naccumulate storage proteins, undergo desiccation tolerance, and prepare to enter into a state of dormancy prior to"]]
["seedev_dev_442", [" (ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4) have reported embryonic functions after the preglobular stage (Palatnik et al. 2003; Mallory et al. 2005; Prigge et al. 2005). miR166-mediated regulation of  [CLS] PHB and PHV has also been reported to be important during early embryonic patterning [CLS]  (Grigg et al. 2009). However, phb phv double mutants do not suppress dcl1-null embryonic phenotypes (Grigg et al. 2009), suggesting that the misregulation of other miRNA targets is required", " PHB, PHV, and TCP4) have reported embryonic functions after the preglobular stage (Palatnik et al. 2003; Mallory et al. 2005; Prigge et al. 2005). miR166-mediated regulation of PHB and  [CLS] PHV has also been reported to be important during early embryonic patterning [CLS]  (Grigg et al. 2009). However, phb phv double mutants do not suppress dcl1-null embryonic phenotypes (Grigg et al. 2009), suggesting that the misregulation of other miRNA targets is required"]]
["seedev_dev_443", [" suggesting that the misregulation of other miRNA targets is required for the dcl1 embryonic phenotypes. Perhaps the loss of both miR156-mediated regulation of SPL transcripts and miR166-mediated regulation\nof  [CLS] HD-ZIPIII transcripts in dcl1 [CLS]  embryos is responsible for the embryonic patterning phenotypes observed. Future characterization of how multiple miRNA/target\ninteractions facilitate embryonic cell differentiation will contribute to a better understanding of how the"]]
["seedev_dev_444", [" suggesting that the misregulation of other miRNA targets is required for the dcl1 embryonic phenotypes. Perhaps the loss of both miR156-mediated regulation of SPL transcripts and miR166-mediated regulation\nof  [CLS] HD-ZIPIII transcripts in dcl1 embryos [CLS]  is responsible for the embryonic patterning phenotypes observed. Future characterization of how multiple miRNA/target\ninteractions facilitate embryonic cell differentiation will contribute to a better understanding of how the basic"]]
["seedev_dev_445", [" in dcl1 embryos (Table 1; Fig. 4A,D). The ability to suppress such a pleiotropic phenotype by knocking out/down only two miRNA targets was surprising when considering\nthat dozens of  [CLS] miRNA targets were derepressed in dcl1 [CLS]  embryos. However, miR156-resistant SPL10 and SPL11 transgenes did not phenocopy dcl1 embryos, which suggests that the misregulation of additional targets contributes to the patterning defects observed. Consistent\nwith this", " cells during post-embryonic development (Laux et al. 1996; Mayer et al. 1998; Wu et al. 2005), we speculate that premature expression of miRNA targets leads to the reduction of  [CLS] WOX2 transcripts in dcl1 [CLS]  embryos and ultimately contributes to precocious differentiation and subsequent loss of developmental potential in preglobular\ncell types.\nThe two transcription factor genes that were most derepressed in eight-cell dcl1", " SPL10, SPL11, ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4), miRNAs maintain the potential of preglobular cells to generate diverse cell types at the subsequent globular stages. Since\nthe reduction of  [CLS] WOX2 transcripts in dcl1 [CLS]  eight-cell embryos was the first detectable differentiation defect, and homeobox genes related to WOX2 have been implicated in maintaining stem cells during post-embryonic development (Laux et al. 1996; Mayer"]]
["seedev_dev_446", [" later stages of morphogenesis (Fig. 3A), SPL10 and SPL11 promoter activities do increase at the same stages that the morphogenesis-to-maturation-phase transition occurs (Fig. 5). Therefore, at later stages of  [CLS] morphogenesis, miR156 may establish a threshold that SPL10 and SPL11 transcript [CLS]  levels must surpass in order to accumulate and promote maturation-phase gene expression programs. Despite the\ncharacterization of hormonal, metabolic, and genetic factors involved in embryo maturation (Nambara and Marion-Poll", " later stages of morphogenesis (Fig. 3A), SPL10 and SPL11 promoter activities do increase at the same stages that the morphogenesis-to-maturation-phase transition occurs (Fig. 5). Therefore, at later stages of  [CLS] morphogenesis, miR156 may establish a threshold that SPL10 and SPL11 transcript [CLS]  levels must surpass in order to accumulate and promote maturation-phase gene expression programs. Despite the\ncharacterization of hormonal, metabolic, and genetic factors involved in embryo maturation (Nambara and Marion-Poll"]]
["seedev_dev_447", [" SPL10, SPL11, ARF17, CNA, PHB, PHV, and TCP4), miRNAs maintain the potential of preglobular cells to generate diverse cell types at the subsequent globular stages. Since\nthe reduction of  [CLS] WOX2 transcripts in dcl1 eight-cell [CLS]  embryos was the first detectable differentiation defect, and homeobox genes related to WOX2 have been implicated in maintaining stem cells during post-embryonic development (Laux et al. 1996; Mayer et"]]
["seedev_dev_448", [" [CLS] lec2-1 dcl1-15 embryos have high levels of chlorophyll and pAt2S3:GFP [CLS] , something not seen in either fus3-3 or lec2-1 embryos (Meinke et al., 1994; Kroj et al., 2003; To et al., 2006), suggesting that after that stage, other miRNA-regulated factors"]]
["seedev_dev_449", [" [CLS] pAt2S3:GFP, something not seen in either fus3-3 or lec2-1 [CLS]  embryos (Meinke et al., 1994; Kroj et al., 2003; To et al., 2006), suggesting that after that stage, other miRNA-regulated factors can compensate for the absence of LEC2 or"]]
["seedev_dev_450", [" [CLS] pAt2S3:GFP, something not seen in either fus3-3 [CLS]  or lec2-1 embryos (Meinke et al., 1994; Kroj et al., 2003; To et al., 2006), suggesting that after that stage, other miRNA-regulated factors can compensate for the absence of"]]
["seedev_dev_451", [" [CLS] fus3-3 dcl1-15 and lec2-1 dcl1-15 embryos have high levels of chlorophyll and pAt2S3:GFP [CLS] , something not seen in either fus3-3 or lec2-1 embryos (Meinke et al., 1994; Kroj et al., 2003; To et al., 2006), suggesting that after that stage, other miRNA-regulated factors"]]
["seedev_dev_452", [" [CLS] after the heart stage, fus3-3 dcl1-15 and lec2-1 dcl1-15 embryos have high levels of chlorophyll and pAt2S3:GFP [CLS] , something not seen in either fus3-3 or lec2-1 embryos (Meinke et al., 1994; Kroj et al., 2003; To et al., 2006), suggesting that after that stage, other miRNA-regulated factors"]]
["seedev_dev_453", [" encoding proteins involved in\nFA biosynthesis (Figure 6A) whereas ABI3, EEL, and FUS3 all have similar expression profiles with genes encoding oleosins and SSPs (Figure\n6B). Two repressors of  [CLS] seed maturation genes, ASIL1 (ARABIDOPSIS 6B-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1-LIKE 1) [69] and PICKLE (PKL [CLS] ) [70], were modestly expressed and exhibited a stable expression pattern throughout seed\nmaturation (Figure 6C). Surprisingly, LEC2, a TF gene known to regulate oil accumulation in leaves and somatic"]]
["seedev_dev_454", [" LEC2 might be only expressed during early embryo morphogenesis [15]. Additionally, based on phenotype descriptions of LEC1, LEC2 mutants in the Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR) [71], the accumulation of  [CLS] storage compounds in the mature lec2 mutant seeds is only slightly defective when compared to lec1 [CLS]  mutant seeds. Therefore, the role of LEC2 as a regulator in the synthesis of seed storage reserves during late stages of zygotic\nembryo development might not be as important"]]
["seedev_dev_455", [" Information Resource (TAIR) [71], the accumulation of storage compounds in the mature lec2 mutant seeds is only slightly defective when compared to lec1 mutant seeds. Therefore, the role of  [CLS] LEC2 as a regulator in the synthesis of seed storage reserves [CLS]  during late stages of zygotic\nembryo development might not be as important as currently thought. Likewise, ABI4 was also essentially unexpressed in these seed samples. The expression similarity\nbetween", " seed maturation genes, ASIL1 (ARABIDOPSIS 6B-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1-LIKE 1) [69] and PICKLE (PKL) [70], were modestly expressed and exhibited a stable expression pattern throughout seed\nmaturation (Figure 6C). Surprisingly,  [CLS] LEC2, a TF gene known to regulate oil accumulation [CLS]  in leaves and somatic embryogenesis\n[10,14,16], was barely detectable in these developing seeds. Although this result requires verification\nwith other molecular methods, it was previously reported that LEC2 might"]]
["seedev_dev_456", ["\nBoth LEC1 and WRI1 were clustered with most FA biosynthetic genes, while ABI5 was clustered with the majority of LATE-EMBRYOGENESIS ABUNDANT (LEA) genes (Figure 3 Cluster 3). LEC1 and  [CLS] WRI1 are known to regulate many FA biosynthetic [CLS]  genes [25-27], and ABI5 regulates a subset of LEAs [72].\n"]]
["seedev_dev_457", [" regulatory relationships.\nBoth LEC1 and WRI1 were clustered with most FA biosynthetic genes, while ABI5 was clustered with the majority of LATE-EMBRYOGENESIS ABUNDANT (LEA) genes (Figure 3 Cluster 3).  [CLS] LEC1 and WRI1 are known to regulate many FA biosynthetic [CLS]  genes [25-27], and ABI5 regulates a subset of LEAs [72].\n"]]
["seedev_dev_458", [" encoding proteins involved in\nFA biosynthesis (Figure 6A) whereas ABI3, EEL, and FUS3 all have similar expression profiles with genes encoding oleosins and SSPs (Figure\n6B). Two repressors of  [CLS] seed maturation genes, ASIL1 [CLS]  (ARABIDOPSIS 6B-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1-LIKE 1) [69] and PICKLE (PKL) [70], were modestly expressed and exhibited a stable expression pattern throughout seed\nmaturation (Figure 6C). Surprisingly, LEC2, a TF gene"]]
["seedev_dev_459", [" LEC2 might be only expressed during early embryo morphogenesis [15]. Additionally, based on phenotype descriptions of LEC1, LEC2 mutants in the Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR) [71], the accumulation of  [CLS] storage compounds in the mature lec2 [CLS]  mutant seeds is only slightly defective when compared to lec1 mutant seeds. Therefore, the role of LEC2 as a regulator in the synthesis of seed storage reserves during late"]]
["seedev_dev_460", [" in\nFA biosynthesis (Figure 6A) whereas ABI3, EEL, and FUS3 all have similar expression profiles with genes encoding oleosins and SSPs (Figure\n6B). Two repressors of seed maturation genes,  [CLS] ASIL1 (ARABIDOPSIS 6B-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1-LIKE 1 [CLS] ) [69] and PICKLE (PKL) [70], were modestly expressed and exhibited a stable expression pattern throughout seed\nmaturation (Figure 6C). Surprisingly, LEC2, a TF gene known to regulate oil accumulation"]]
["seedev_dev_461", [" and FUS3 all have similar expression profiles with genes encoding oleosins and SSPs (Figure\n6B). Two repressors of seed maturation genes, ASIL1 (ARABIDOPSIS 6B-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1-LIKE 1) [69] and  [CLS] PICKLE (PKL [CLS] ) [70], were modestly expressed and exhibited a stable expression pattern throughout seed\nmaturation (Figure 6C). Surprisingly, LEC2, a TF gene known to regulate oil accumulation in leaves and somatic"]]
["seedev_dev_462", [" relationships in gene coexpression and regulation, we\nfirst identified the expression patterns for several TFs known to regulate the accumulation\nof seed storage reserves (Figure 6). AGL15 (AGAMOUS-LIKE 15),  [CLS] GL2 (GLABRA2 [CLS] ), LEC1, L1L, and WRI1 exhibited similar expression patterns with most genes encoding proteins involved in\nFA biosynthesis (Figure 6A) whereas ABI3, EEL, and FUS3 all have similar expression profiles"]]
["seedev_dev_463", [" TFs and their target genes is suggestive of regulatory relationships.\nBoth LEC1 and WRI1 were clustered with most FA biosynthetic genes, while ABI5 was clustered with the majority of  [CLS] LATE-EMBRYOGENESIS ABUNDANT (LEA [CLS] ) genes (Figure 3 Cluster 3). LEC1 and WRI1 are known to regulate many FA biosynthetic genes [25-27], and ABI5 regulates a subset of LEAs [72].\n"]]
["seedev_dev_464", [" insight into possible relationships in gene coexpression and regulation, we\nfirst identified the expression patterns for several TFs known to regulate the accumulation\nof seed storage reserves (Figure 6).  [CLS] AGL15 (AGAMOUS-LIKE 15 [CLS] ), GL2 (GLABRA2), LEC1, L1L, and WRI1 exhibited similar expression patterns with most genes encoding proteins involved in\nFA biosynthesis (Figure 6A) whereas ABI3, EEL, and FUS3 all have similar"]]
["seedev_dev_465", [" while ABI5 was clustered with the majority of LATE-EMBRYOGENESIS ABUNDANT (LEA) genes (Figure 3 Cluster 3). LEC1 and WRI1 are known to regulate many FA biosynthetic genes [25-27], and  [CLS] ABI5 regulates a subset of LEAs [CLS]  [72].\n"]]
["seedev_dev_466", [" oil accumulation in leaves and somatic embryogenesis\n[10,14,16], was barely detectable in these developing seeds. Although this result requires verification\nwith other molecular methods, it was previously reported that  [CLS] LEC2 might be only expressed during early embryo morphogenesis [CLS]  [15]. Additionally, based on phenotype descriptions of LEC1, LEC2 mutants in the Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR) [71], the accumulation of storage compounds in the mature lec2 mutant seeds is"]]
["seedev_dev_467", [" seed maturation genes, ASIL1 (ARABIDOPSIS 6B-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1-LIKE 1) [69] and PICKLE (PKL) [70], were modestly expressed and exhibited a stable expression pattern throughout seed\nmaturation (Figure 6C). Surprisingly,  [CLS] LEC2, a TF gene known to regulate oil accumulation in leaves and somatic embryogenesis\n[10,14,16], was barely detectable in these developing seeds [CLS] . Although this result requires verification\nwith other molecular methods, it was previously reported that LEC2 might be only expressed during early embryo morphogenesis [15]. Additionally, based on phenotype descriptions"]]
["seedev_dev_468", [" FUS3 all have similar expression profiles with genes encoding oleosins and SSPs (Figure\n6B). Two repressors of seed maturation genes, ASIL1 (ARABIDOPSIS 6B-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1-LIKE 1) [69] and PICKLE ( [CLS] PKL) [70], were modestly expressed and exhibited a stable expression pattern throughout seed\nmaturation [CLS]  (Figure 6C). Surprisingly, LEC2, a TF gene known to regulate oil accumulation in leaves and somatic embryogenesis\n[10,14,16], was barely detectable in these developing seeds. Although this result requires", " in\nFA biosynthesis (Figure 6A) whereas ABI3, EEL, and FUS3 all have similar expression profiles with genes encoding oleosins and SSPs (Figure\n6B). Two repressors of seed maturation genes,  [CLS] ASIL1 (ARABIDOPSIS 6B-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1-LIKE 1) [69] and PICKLE (PKL) [70], were modestly expressed and exhibited a stable expression pattern throughout seed\nmaturation [CLS]  (Figure 6C). Surprisingly, LEC2, a TF gene known to regulate oil accumulation in leaves and somatic embryogenesis\n[10,14,16], was barely detectable in these developing seeds. Although this result requires"]]
["seedev_dev_469", [" role of LEC2 as a regulator in the synthesis of seed storage reserves during late stages of zygotic\nembryo development might not be as important as currently thought. Likewise,  [CLS] ABI4 was also essentially unexpressed in these seed [CLS]  samples. The expression similarity\nbetween genes encoding TFs and their target genes is suggestive of regulatory relationships.\nBoth LEC1 and WRI1 were clustered with most FA biosynthetic genes, while"]]
["seedev_dev_470", [" seed maturation genes, ASIL1 (ARABIDOPSIS 6B-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1-LIKE 1) [69] and PICKLE (PKL) [70], were modestly expressed and exhibited a stable expression pattern throughout seed\nmaturation (Figure 6C). Surprisingly,  [CLS] LEC2, a TF gene known to regulate oil accumulation in leaves [CLS]  and somatic embryogenesis\n[10,14,16], was barely detectable in these developing seeds. Although this result requires verification\nwith other molecular methods, it was previously reported that LEC2 might be only"]]
["seedev_dev_471", [" Information Resource (TAIR) [71], the accumulation of storage compounds in the mature lec2 mutant seeds is only slightly defective when compared to lec1 mutant seeds. Therefore, the role of  [CLS] LEC2 as a regulator in the synthesis of seed storage reserves during late stages of zygotic\nembryo development [CLS]  might not be as important as currently thought. Likewise, ABI4 was also essentially unexpressed in these seed samples. The expression similarity\nbetween genes encoding TFs and their target genes"]]
["seedev_dev_472", [" LEC2 might be only expressed during early embryo morphogenesis [15]. Additionally, based on phenotype descriptions of LEC1, LEC2 mutants in the Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR) [71], the accumulation of  [CLS] storage compounds in the mature lec2 mutant seeds is only slightly defective when compared to lec1 mutant seeds [CLS] . Therefore, the role of LEC2 as a regulator in the synthesis of seed storage reserves during late stages of zygotic\nembryo development might not be as important as currently", " LEC2 might be only expressed during early embryo morphogenesis [15]. Additionally, based on phenotype descriptions of LEC1, LEC2 mutants in the Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR) [71], the accumulation of  [CLS] storage compounds in the mature lec2 mutant seeds [CLS]  is only slightly defective when compared to lec1 mutant seeds. Therefore, the role of LEC2 as a regulator in the synthesis of seed storage reserves during late stages of"]]
["seedev_dev_473", [" of storage compounds in the mature lec2 mutant seeds is only slightly defective when compared to lec1 mutant seeds. Therefore, the role of LEC2 as a regulator in the  [CLS] synthesis of seed storage reserves during late stages of zygotic\nembryo development [CLS]  might not be as important as currently thought. Likewise, ABI4 was also essentially unexpressed in these seed samples. The expression similarity\nbetween genes encoding TFs and their target genes"]]
["seedev_dev_474", [" 1-LIKE 1) [69] and PICKLE (PKL) [70], were modestly expressed and exhibited a stable expression pattern throughout seed\nmaturation (Figure 6C). Surprisingly, LEC2, a TF gene known to regulate  [CLS] oil accumulation in leaves [CLS]  and somatic embryogenesis\n[10,14,16], was barely detectable in these developing seeds. Although this result requires verification\nwith other molecular methods, it was previously reported that LEC2 might be only"]]
["seedev_dev_475", [" [CLS] embryogenesis is divided conceptually into two distinct phases:\nearly morphogenetic processes [CLS]  that give rise to embryonic cell types,\ntissues, and organ systems, and late maturation events that allow the\nfully developed embryo to enter a desiccated and metabolically quiescent\nstate"]]
["seedev_dev_476", [" a desiccated and metabolically quiescent\nstate ([52]\u00a0and\u00a0[13]).\nUpon reception of the appropriate signals, the dormant embryo\ngerminates, and seedling development begins. Thus, seed maturation and\nmetabolic quiescence interrupt the  [CLS] morphogenetic processes that occur\nduring embryogenesis [CLS]  and seedling development. This unique form of\ndevelopment underlies, in part, a plant's ability to make seeds, a trait\nthat has conferred significant selective advantages to higher plants (Steeves", " a desiccated and metabolically quiescent\nstate ([52]\u00a0and\u00a0[13]).\nUpon reception of the appropriate signals, the dormant embryo\ngerminates, and seedling development begins. Thus, seed maturation and\nmetabolic quiescence interrupt the  [CLS] morphogenetic processes that occur\nduring embryogenesis and seedling development [CLS] . This unique form of\ndevelopment underlies, in part, a plant's ability to make seeds, a trait\nthat has conferred significant selective advantages to higher plants (Steeves 1983).\nBecause lower"]]
["seedev_dev_477", [" seed maturation and\nmetabolic quiescence interrupt the morphogenetic processes that occur\nduring embryogenesis and seedling development. This unique form of\ndevelopment underlies, in part, a plant's ability to make  [CLS] seeds, a trait\nthat has conferred significant selective advantages to higher plants [CLS]  (Steeves 1983).\nBecause lower plants do not make seeds and do not undergo embryo\nmaturation, this bipartite mode of embryogenesis is thought to have\nresulted from the insertion of", " development. This unique form of\ndevelopment underlies, in part, a plant's ability to make seeds, a trait\nthat has conferred significant selective advantages to higher plants (Steeves 1983).\nBecause  [CLS] lower plants do not make seeds [CLS]  and do not undergo embryo\nmaturation, this bipartite mode of embryogenesis is thought to have\nresulted from the insertion of maturation events into the higher plant\nlife cycle (reviewed"]]
["seedev_dev_478", [" [CLS] embryogenesis is divided conceptually into two distinct phases:\nearly morphogenetic processes that give rise to embryonic cell types,\ntissues, and organ systems, and late maturation events [CLS]  that allow the\nfully developed embryo to enter a desiccated and metabolically quiescent\nstate ([52]\u00a0and\u00a0[13]).\nUpon reception of the appropriate signals, the dormant embryo\ngerminates, and seedling development begins."]]
["seedev_dev_479", [" it encodes a homolog of a conserved eukaryotic transcription factor. Expression studies showed that the LEC1 gene is active only within seeds during both early and late seed development.  [CLS] Ectopic expression of the LEC1\ngene induces embryonic programs and embryo development [CLS]  in vegetative\ncells. We suggest that LEC1 is an important transcriptional regulator\nrequired for both early and late embryogenesis that controls and\ncoordinates higher plant embryo development.\n"]]
["seedev_dev_480", [" A\nsecond class of genes predicted to play a role in embryonic pattern\nformation has been identified (Mayer et al. 1991). The expression patterns of two such genes, EMB30 ( [CLS] GNOM) and KNOLLE, suggest that they do not function specifically during embryogenesis [CLS]  ([42]\u00a0and\u00a0[23]). Another class, including SHOOTMERISTEMLESS and SCARECROW, is active in the developing shoot or root apical meristems ([9]\u00a0and\u00a0[22]).\nAlthough these genes play key roles in meristem function, they are"]]
["seedev_dev_481", [" to\nproduce homozygous mutant plants that are fertile and that do not\ndisplay any obvious vegetative or floral mutant phenotypes ([28]\u00a0and\u00a0[53]). Two other LEC class genes, LEC2 and FUSCA3 ( [CLS] FUS3), are thought to share similar or overlapping functions with LEC1, including the specification or cotyledon identity [CLS]  and the maintenance of maturation ([2],\n[18]\u00a0and\u00a0[29]). Although nothing has been reported about how LEC\nclass genes act at the molecular level, their involvement in many\ndiverse aspects of", " to\nproduce homozygous mutant plants that are fertile and that do not\ndisplay any obvious vegetative or floral mutant phenotypes ([28]\u00a0and\u00a0[53]). Two other LEC class genes, LEC2 and FUSCA3 ( [CLS] FUS3), are thought to share similar or overlapping functions with LEC1, including the specification or cotyledon identity and the maintenance of maturation [CLS]  ([2],\n[18]\u00a0and\u00a0[29]). Although nothing has been reported about how LEC\nclass genes act at the molecular level, their involvement in many\ndiverse aspects of embryogenesis suggests that these genes"]]
["seedev_dev_482", [" it encodes a homolog of a conserved eukaryotic transcription factor. Expression studies showed that the LEC1 gene is active only within seeds during both early and late seed development.  [CLS] Ectopic expression of the LEC1\ngene induces embryonic programs [CLS]  and embryo development in vegetative\ncells. We suggest that LEC1 is an important transcriptional regulator\nrequired for both early and late embryogenesis that controls and\ncoordinates higher plant embryo"]]
["seedev_dev_483", [" Ectopic expression of the LEC1\ngene induces embryonic programs and embryo development in vegetative\ncells. We suggest that LEC1 is an important transcriptional regulator\nrequired for both early and  [CLS] late embryogenesis that controls and\ncoordinates higher plant embryo development [CLS] .\n"]]
["seedev_dev_484", [" active only within seeds during both early and late seed development. Ectopic expression of the LEC1\ngene induces embryonic programs and embryo development in vegetative\ncells. We suggest that  [CLS] LEC1 is an important transcriptional regulator\nrequired for both early and late embryogenesis [CLS]  that controls and\ncoordinates higher plant embryo development.\n", " active only within seeds during both early and late seed development. Ectopic expression of the LEC1\ngene induces embryonic programs and embryo development in vegetative\ncells. We suggest that  [CLS] LEC1 is an important transcriptional regulator\nrequired for both early and late embryogenesis [CLS]  that controls and\ncoordinates higher plant embryo development.\n"]]
["seedev_dev_485", [" development. This unique form of\ndevelopment underlies, in part, a plant's ability to make seeds, a trait\nthat has conferred significant selective advantages to higher plants (Steeves 1983).\nBecause  [CLS] lower plants do not make seeds and do not undergo embryo\nmaturation [CLS] , this bipartite mode of embryogenesis is thought to have\nresulted from the insertion of maturation events into the higher plant\nlife cycle (reviewed by\n[51],\n[47]\u00a0and\u00a0[16]).\nLittle is known"]]
["seedev_dev_486", [" and seed maturation phases are\ncoordinated.Genetic strategies employed to identify regulators of Arabidopsis thaliana embryo development have distinguished several gene classes that affect embryogenesis. One class of mutations, including  [CLS] raspberry, tinman, and abnormal suspensor ([41],\n[56],\n[7]\u00a0and\u00a0[49];\nT. L. et al, unpublished data), causes the arrest of embryo\nmorphogenesis [CLS] . Many of the corresponding proteins are involved in basic\ncellular functions and probably do not perform direct regulatory roles. A\nsecond class of genes predicted to play a role"]]
["seedev_dev_487", [" or root apical meristems ([9]\u00a0and\u00a0[22]).\nAlthough these genes play key roles in meristem function, they are\nrequired for meristem formation during both embryogenesis and\npostembryonic development. ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE3 ( [CLS] ABI3), a fourth gene class, encodes an embryo-specific transcription factor that regulates genes expressed during seed maturation [CLS]  ([20]\u00a0and\u00a0[38]).\nHowever, its function is limited to the late stages of embryogenesis.\nAlthough each of these gene classes is essential for embryo development,\nnone appears to act specifically during", " or root apical meristems ([9]\u00a0and\u00a0[22]).\nAlthough these genes play key roles in meristem function, they are\nrequired for meristem formation during both embryogenesis and\npostembryonic development. ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE3 ( [CLS] ABI3), a fourth gene class, encodes an embryo-specific transcription factor that regulates genes expressed during seed maturation ([20]\u00a0and\u00a0[38]).\nHowever, its function is limited to the late stages of embryogenesis [CLS] .\nAlthough each of these gene classes is essential for embryo development,\nnone appears to act specifically during embryogenesis to control both\nthe morphogenesis and maturation phases.The LEAFY COTYLEDON1 (LEC1)"]]
["seedev_dev_488", [" class of genes predicted to play a role in embryonic pattern\nformation has been identified (Mayer et al. 1991). The expression patterns of two such genes, EMB30 (GNOM) and  [CLS] KNOLLE, suggest that they do not function specifically during embryogenesis [CLS]  ([42]\u00a0and\u00a0[23]). Another class, including SHOOTMERISTEMLESS and SCARECROW, is active in the developing shoot or root apical meristems ([9]\u00a0and\u00a0[22]).\nAlthough these genes play key roles in meristem function, they are"]]
["seedev_dev_489", [" seed development. Ectopic expression of the LEC1\ngene induces embryonic programs and embryo development in vegetative\ncells. We suggest that LEC1 is an important transcriptional regulator\nrequired for both  [CLS] early and late embryogenesis that controls and\ncoordinates higher plant embryo development [CLS] .\n"]]
["seedev_dev_490", ["\nmutant embryos are intolerant of desiccation and show defects in the\nexpression of some, but not all, maturation-specific genes ([28],\n[53]\u00a0and\u00a0[39]). LEC1 is also involved in inhibiting premature germination.  [CLS] lec1\nmutant embryos exhibit morphological and molecular characteristics of\nboth embryogenesis [CLS]  and postgerminative seedling development, showing\nthat aspects of both programs can occur simultaneously (Meinke 1992Meinke, 1992, 1994; West et al. 1994). LEC1 plays a role in the specification of", "\nmutant embryos are intolerant of desiccation and show defects in the\nexpression of some, but not all, maturation-specific genes ([28],\n[53]\u00a0and\u00a0[39]). LEC1 is also involved in inhibiting premature germination.  [CLS] lec1\nmutant embryos exhibit morphological and molecular characteristics of\nboth embryogenesis and postgerminative seedling development [CLS] , showing\nthat aspects of both programs can occur simultaneously (Meinke 1992Meinke, 1992, 1994; West et al. 1994). LEC1 plays a role in the specification of embryonic organ identity as", " both\nthe morphogenesis and maturation phases.The LEAFY COTYLEDON1 (LEC1) gene, by contrast, controls many distinct aspects of embryogenesis (Meinke 1992Meinke, 1992, 1994;\n[53]\u00a0and\u00a0[39]). As summarized in Figure 1, the  [CLS] lec1 mutation is pleiotropic, indicating several roles in late embryo development [CLS] . LEC1 is required for specific aspects of seed maturation. lec1\nmutant embryos are intolerant of desiccation and show defects in the\nexpression of some, but not all, maturation-specific genes"]]
["seedev_dev_491", [" thought to share similar or overlapping functions with LEC1, including the specification or cotyledon identity and the maintenance of maturation ([2],\n[18]\u00a0and\u00a0[29]). Although nothing has been reported about how  [CLS] LEC\nclass genes act at the molecular level, their involvement in many\ndiverse aspects of embryogenesis suggests that these genes serve as\nregulators of higher plant embryonic processes [CLS] .Figure 1.\u00a0Pleiotropic Effects of the lec1 Mutation on Embryo DevelopmentMajor differences between wild-type and lec1\nmutant embryos are as follows. Embryo shape: the axes of mutant embryos\nare short, and"]]
["seedev_dev_492", [" desiccation and germinated to\nproduce homozygous mutant plants that are fertile and that do not\ndisplay any obvious vegetative or floral mutant phenotypes ([28]\u00a0and\u00a0[53]). Two other LEC class genes,  [CLS] LEC2 and FUSCA3 (FUS3), are thought to share similar or overlapping functions with LEC1, including the specification or cotyledon identity [CLS]  and the maintenance of maturation ([2],\n[18]\u00a0and\u00a0[29]). Although nothing has been reported about how LEC\nclass genes act at the molecular level, their involvement in many\ndiverse aspects of", " desiccation and germinated to\nproduce homozygous mutant plants that are fertile and that do not\ndisplay any obvious vegetative or floral mutant phenotypes ([28]\u00a0and\u00a0[53]). Two other LEC class genes,  [CLS] LEC2 and FUSCA3 (FUS3), are thought to share similar or overlapping functions with LEC1, including the specification or cotyledon identity and the maintenance of maturation [CLS]  ([2],\n[18]\u00a0and\u00a0[29]). Although nothing has been reported about how LEC\nclass genes act at the molecular level, their involvement in many\ndiverse aspects of embryogenesis suggests that these genes"]]
["seedev_dev_493", [" exhibit morphological and molecular characteristics of\nboth embryogenesis and postgerminative seedling development, showing\nthat aspects of both programs can occur simultaneously (Meinke 1992Meinke, 1992, 1994; West et al. 1994).  [CLS] LEC1 plays a role in the specification of embryonic organ identity [CLS]  as well. Embryonic leaves or cotyledons of lec1 mutants possess trichomes, epidermal hairs, which normally form only on leaves and stems in Arabidopsis ([28]\u00a0and\u00a0[53]). The anatomy of lec1 mutant", " do not\ndisplay any obvious vegetative or floral mutant phenotypes ([28]\u00a0and\u00a0[53]). Two other LEC class genes, LEC2 and FUSCA3 (FUS3), are thought to share similar or overlapping functions with  [CLS] LEC1, including the specification or cotyledon identity and the maintenance of maturation [CLS]  ([2],\n[18]\u00a0and\u00a0[29]). Although nothing has been reported about how LEC\nclass genes act at the molecular level, their involvement in many\ndiverse aspects of embryogenesis suggests that these genes", " do not\ndisplay any obvious vegetative or floral mutant phenotypes ([28]\u00a0and\u00a0[53]). Two other LEC class genes, LEC2 and FUSCA3 (FUS3), are thought to share similar or overlapping functions with  [CLS] LEC1, including the specification or cotyledon identity [CLS]  and the maintenance of maturation ([2],\n[18]\u00a0and\u00a0[29]). Although nothing has been reported about how LEC\nclass genes act at the molecular level, their involvement in many\ndiverse aspects of"]]
["seedev_dev_494", [" 1992, 1994;\n[53]\u00a0and\u00a0[39]). As summarized in Figure 1, the lec1 mutation is pleiotropic, indicating several roles in late embryo development. LEC1 is required for specific aspects of seed maturation.  [CLS] lec1\nmutant embryos are intolerant of desiccation and show defects in the\nexpression of some, but not all, maturation-specific genes [CLS]  ([28],\n[53]\u00a0and\u00a0[39]). LEC1 is also involved in inhibiting premature germination. lec1\nmutant embryos exhibit morphological and molecular characteristics of\nboth embryogenesis and postgerminative seedling development, showing\nthat aspects of", " embryos are\nactivated in that they are domed and possess leaf primordia, unlike\ntheir wild-type counterparts that are flat and do not contain leaf\nprimordia. Defects in seed maturation:  [CLS] lec1 mutant embryos are intolerant of desiccation [CLS]  and normally die if dried on the plant. However, lec1\nembryos isolated before desiccation can be germinated to produce\nfertile homozygous mutant plants. The promoter of a 7S storage", " 1992, 1994;\n[53]\u00a0and\u00a0[39]). As summarized in Figure 1, the lec1 mutation is pleiotropic, indicating several roles in late embryo development. LEC1 is required for specific aspects of seed maturation.  [CLS] lec1\nmutant embryos are intolerant of desiccation [CLS]  and show defects in the\nexpression of some, but not all, maturation-specific genes ([28],\n[53]\u00a0and\u00a0[39]). LEC1 is also involved in inhibiting premature germination. lec1\nmutant embryos exhibit morphological and"]]
["seedev_dev_495", [" [CLS] late maturation events that allow the\nfully developed embryo [CLS]  to enter a desiccated and metabolically quiescent\nstate ([52]\u00a0and\u00a0[13]).\nUpon reception of the appropriate signals, the dormant embryo\ngerminates, and seedling development begins. Thus, seed maturation and\nmetabolic quiescence"]]
["seedev_dev_496", [" on leaves and stems in Arabidopsis ([28]\u00a0and\u00a0[53]). The anatomy of lec1 mutant cotyledons is intermediate between those of a wild-type cotyledon and a leaf (West et al. 1994). Finally,  [CLS] LEC1 appears to act only during embryo development [CLS] . Desiccation-intolerant lec1\nembryos can be rescued from plants before desiccation and germinated to\nproduce homozygous mutant plants that are fertile and that do not\ndisplay any obvious vegetative or", " embryogenesis.\nAlthough each of these gene classes is essential for embryo development,\nnone appears to act specifically during embryogenesis to control both\nthe morphogenesis and maturation phases.The LEAFY COTYLEDON1 ( [CLS] LEC1) gene, by contrast, controls many distinct aspects of embryogenesis [CLS]  (Meinke 1992Meinke, 1992, 1994;\n[53]\u00a0and\u00a0[39]). As summarized in Figure 1, the lec1 mutation is pleiotropic, indicating several roles in late embryo development. LEC1 is required for specific aspects of", " required for specific aspects of seed maturation. lec1\nmutant embryos are intolerant of desiccation and show defects in the\nexpression of some, but not all, maturation-specific genes ([28],\n[53]\u00a0and\u00a0[39]).  [CLS] LEC1 is also involved in inhibiting premature germination [CLS] . lec1\nmutant embryos exhibit morphological and molecular characteristics of\nboth embryogenesis and postgerminative seedling development, showing\nthat aspects of both programs can occur simultaneously (Meinke 1992Meinke, 1992, 1994; West", " contrast, controls many distinct aspects of embryogenesis (Meinke 1992Meinke, 1992, 1994;\n[53]\u00a0and\u00a0[39]). As summarized in Figure 1, the lec1 mutation is pleiotropic, indicating several roles in late embryo development.  [CLS] LEC1 is required for specific aspects of seed maturation [CLS] . lec1\nmutant embryos are intolerant of desiccation and show defects in the\nexpression of some, but not all, maturation-specific genes ([28],\n[53]\u00a0and\u00a0[39]). LEC1 is also involved in inhibiting premature"]]
["seedev_dev_497", [" phases are\ncoordinated.Genetic strategies employed to identify regulators of Arabidopsis thaliana embryo development have distinguished several gene classes that affect embryogenesis. One class of mutations, including raspberry, tinman, and  [CLS] abnormal suspensor ([41],\n[56],\n[7]\u00a0and\u00a0[49];\nT. L. et al, unpublished data), causes the arrest of embryo\nmorphogenesis [CLS] . Many of the corresponding proteins are involved in basic\ncellular functions and probably do not perform direct regulatory roles. A\nsecond class of genes predicted to play a role"]]
["seedev_dev_498", [" (Steeves 1983).\nBecause lower plants do not make seeds and do not undergo embryo\nmaturation, this bipartite mode of embryogenesis is thought to have\nresulted from the insertion of  [CLS] maturation events into the higher plant [CLS] \nlife cycle (reviewed by\n[51],\n[47]\u00a0and\u00a0[16]).\nLittle is known at the mechanistic level about how distinct processes\nthat occur during the morphogenesis and seed maturation phases are\ncoordinated.Genetic strategies"]]
["seedev_dev_499", [" embryos are intolerant of desiccation and normally die if dried on the plant. However, lec1\nembryos isolated before desiccation can be germinated to produce\nfertile homozygous mutant plants. The  [CLS] promoter of a 7S storage protein\ngene that is normally active during wild-type embryogenesis [CLS]  is not\nactive in the lec1 mutant. Incomplete specification of cotyledon identity: lec1 seedlings possess trichomes on cotyledons. Trichomes are present on Arabidopsis leaves and stems but not on"]]
["seedev_dev_500", [" [CLS] early morphogenetic processes that give rise to embryonic cell types,\ntissues [CLS] , and organ systems, and late maturation events that allow the\nfully developed embryo to enter a desiccated and metabolically quiescent\nstate ([52]\u00a0and\u00a0[13]).\nUpon reception of the appropriate signals, the", " [CLS] early morphogenetic processes that give rise to embryonic cell types,\ntissues, and organ systems [CLS] , and late maturation events that allow the\nfully developed embryo to enter a desiccated and metabolically quiescent\nstate ([52]\u00a0and\u00a0[13]).\nUpon reception of the appropriate signals, the dormant embryo\ngerminates,"]]
["seedev_dev_501", [" developed embryo to enter a desiccated and metabolically quiescent\nstate ([52]\u00a0and\u00a0[13]).\nUpon reception of the appropriate signals, the dormant embryo\ngerminates, and seedling development begins. Thus, seed maturation and\n [CLS] metabolic quiescence interrupt the morphogenetic processes [CLS]  that occur\nduring embryogenesis and seedling development. This unique form of\ndevelopment underlies, in part, a plant's ability to make seeds, a trait\nthat has conferred significant selective advantages"]]
["seedev_dev_502", [" seed maturation phases are\ncoordinated.Genetic strategies employed to identify regulators of Arabidopsis thaliana embryo development have distinguished several gene classes that affect embryogenesis. One class of mutations, including raspberry,  [CLS] tinman, and abnormal suspensor ([41],\n[56],\n[7]\u00a0and\u00a0[49];\nT. L. et al, unpublished data), causes the arrest of embryo\nmorphogenesis [CLS] . Many of the corresponding proteins are involved in basic\ncellular functions and probably do not perform direct regulatory roles. A\nsecond class of genes predicted to play a role"]]
["seedev_dev_503", [" from plants before desiccation and germinated to\nproduce homozygous mutant plants that are fertile and that do not\ndisplay any obvious vegetative or floral mutant phenotypes ([28]\u00a0and\u00a0[53]). Two other  [CLS] LEC class genes, LEC2 and FUSCA3 (FUS3 [CLS] ), are thought to share similar or overlapping functions with LEC1, including the specification or cotyledon identity and the maintenance of maturation ([2],\n[18]\u00a0and\u00a0[29]). Although nothing has been reported about"]]
["seedev_dev_504", [" from plants before desiccation and germinated to\nproduce homozygous mutant plants that are fertile and that do not\ndisplay any obvious vegetative or floral mutant phenotypes ([28]\u00a0and\u00a0[53]). Two other  [CLS] LEC class genes, LEC2 [CLS]  and FUSCA3 (FUS3), are thought to share similar or overlapping functions with LEC1, including the specification or cotyledon identity and the maintenance of maturation ([2],\n[18]\u00a0and\u00a0[29]). Although nothing has"]]
["seedev_dev_505", [" et al. 1991). The expression patterns of two such genes, EMB30 (GNOM) and KNOLLE, suggest that they do not function specifically during embryogenesis ([42]\u00a0and\u00a0[23]). Another class, including SHOOTMERISTEMLESS and  [CLS] SCARECROW, is active in the developing shoot [CLS]  or root apical meristems ([9]\u00a0and\u00a0[22]).\nAlthough these genes play key roles in meristem function, they are\nrequired for meristem formation during both embryogenesis and\npostembryonic development. ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE3", " identified (Mayer et al. 1991). The expression patterns of two such genes, EMB30 (GNOM) and KNOLLE, suggest that they do not function specifically during embryogenesis ([42]\u00a0and\u00a0[23]). Another class, including  [CLS] SHOOTMERISTEMLESS and SCARECROW, is active in the developing shoot [CLS]  or root apical meristems ([9]\u00a0and\u00a0[22]).\nAlthough these genes play key roles in meristem function, they are\nrequired for meristem formation during both embryogenesis and\npostembryonic development. ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE3"]]
["seedev_dev_506", [" (116K)In this paper, we report the isolation of the LEC1 gene and show that it encodes a homolog of a conserved eukaryotic transcription factor. Expression studies showed that the  [CLS] LEC1 gene is active only within seeds [CLS]  during both early and late seed development. Ectopic expression of the LEC1\ngene induces embryonic programs and embryo development in vegetative\ncells. We suggest that LEC1 is an important"]]
["seedev_dev_507", [" identified (Mayer et al. 1991). The expression patterns of two such genes, EMB30 (GNOM) and KNOLLE, suggest that they do not function specifically during embryogenesis ([42]\u00a0and\u00a0[23]). Another class, including  [CLS] SHOOTMERISTEMLESS and SCARECROW, is active in the developing shoot or root apical meristems [CLS]  ([9]\u00a0and\u00a0[22]).\nAlthough these genes play key roles in meristem function, they are\nrequired for meristem formation during both embryogenesis and\npostembryonic development. ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE3 (ABI3), a fourth gene", " et al. 1991). The expression patterns of two such genes, EMB30 (GNOM) and KNOLLE, suggest that they do not function specifically during embryogenesis ([42]\u00a0and\u00a0[23]). Another class, including SHOOTMERISTEMLESS and  [CLS] SCARECROW, is active in the developing shoot or root apical meristems [CLS]  ([9]\u00a0and\u00a0[22]).\nAlthough these genes play key roles in meristem function, they are\nrequired for meristem formation during both embryogenesis and\npostembryonic development. ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE3 (ABI3), a fourth gene"]]
["seedev_dev_508", [" identified (Mayer et al. 1991). The expression patterns of two such genes, EMB30 (GNOM) and KNOLLE, suggest that they do not function specifically during embryogenesis ([42]\u00a0and\u00a0[23]). Another class, including  [CLS] SHOOTMERISTEMLESS and SCARECROW, is active in the developing shoot or root apical meristems ([9]\u00a0and\u00a0[22]).\nAlthough these genes play key roles in meristem [CLS]  function, they are\nrequired for meristem formation during both embryogenesis and\npostembryonic development. ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE3 (ABI3), a fourth gene class, encodes an embryo-specific transcription factor that regulates genes", " et al. 1991). The expression patterns of two such genes, EMB30 (GNOM) and KNOLLE, suggest that they do not function specifically during embryogenesis ([42]\u00a0and\u00a0[23]). Another class, including SHOOTMERISTEMLESS and  [CLS] SCARECROW, is active in the developing shoot or root apical meristems ([9]\u00a0and\u00a0[22]).\nAlthough these genes play key roles in meristem [CLS]  function, they are\nrequired for meristem formation during both embryogenesis and\npostembryonic development. ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE3 (ABI3), a fourth gene class, encodes an embryo-specific transcription factor that regulates genes"]]
["seedev_dev_509", [" identified (Mayer et al. 1991). The expression patterns of two such genes, EMB30 (GNOM) and KNOLLE, suggest that they do not function specifically during embryogenesis ([42]\u00a0and\u00a0[23]). Another class, including  [CLS] SHOOTMERISTEMLESS and SCARECROW, is active in the developing shoot or root apical meristems ([9]\u00a0and\u00a0[22]).\nAlthough these genes play key roles in meristem function, they are\nrequired for meristem formation [CLS]  during both embryogenesis and\npostembryonic development. ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE3 (ABI3), a fourth gene class, encodes an embryo-specific transcription factor that regulates genes expressed during seed maturation ([20]\u00a0and\u00a0[38]).\nHowever, its", " et al. 1991). The expression patterns of two such genes, EMB30 (GNOM) and KNOLLE, suggest that they do not function specifically during embryogenesis ([42]\u00a0and\u00a0[23]). Another class, including SHOOTMERISTEMLESS and  [CLS] SCARECROW, is active in the developing shoot or root apical meristems ([9]\u00a0and\u00a0[22]).\nAlthough these genes play key roles in meristem function, they are\nrequired for meristem formation [CLS]  during both embryogenesis and\npostembryonic development. ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE3 (ABI3), a fourth gene class, encodes an embryo-specific transcription factor that regulates genes expressed during seed maturation ([20]\u00a0and\u00a0[38]).\nHowever, its"]]
["seedev_dev_510", [" the developing shoot or root apical meristems ([9]\u00a0and\u00a0[22]).\nAlthough these genes play key roles in meristem function, they are\nrequired for meristem formation during both embryogenesis and\npostembryonic development.  [CLS] ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE3 (ABI3 [CLS] ), a fourth gene class, encodes an embryo-specific transcription factor that regulates genes expressed during seed maturation ([20]\u00a0and\u00a0[38]).\nHowever, its function is limited to the late stages of embryogenesis.\nAlthough"]]
["seedev_dev_511", [" germinated to\nproduce homozygous mutant plants that are fertile and that do not\ndisplay any obvious vegetative or floral mutant phenotypes ([28]\u00a0and\u00a0[53]). Two other LEC class genes, LEC2 and  [CLS] FUSCA3 (FUS3 [CLS] ), are thought to share similar or overlapping functions with LEC1, including the specification or cotyledon identity and the maintenance of maturation ([2],\n[18]\u00a0and\u00a0[29]). Although nothing has been reported about"]]
["seedev_dev_512", [" roles. A\nsecond class of genes predicted to play a role in embryonic pattern\nformation has been identified (Mayer et al. 1991). The expression patterns of two such genes,  [CLS] EMB30 (GNOM [CLS] ) and KNOLLE, suggest that they do not function specifically during embryogenesis ([42]\u00a0and\u00a0[23]). Another class, including SHOOTMERISTEMLESS and SCARECROW, is active in the developing shoot or root apical meristems ([9]\u00a0and\u00a0[22])."]]
["seedev_dev_513", [" stages of embryogenesis.\nAlthough each of these gene classes is essential for embryo development,\nnone appears to act specifically during embryogenesis to control both\nthe morphogenesis and maturation phases.The  [CLS] LEAFY COTYLEDON1 (LEC1 [CLS] ) gene, by contrast, controls many distinct aspects of embryogenesis (Meinke 1992Meinke, 1992, 1994;\n[53]\u00a0and\u00a0[39]). As summarized in Figure 1, the lec1 mutation is pleiotropic, indicating several roles in late"]]
["seedev_dev_514", [" [CLS] Higher\nplant embryogenesis is divided conceptually into two distinct phases:\nearly morphogenetic processes [CLS]  that give rise to embryonic cell types,\ntissues, and organ systems, and late maturation events that allow the\nfully developed embryo to enter a desiccated and metabolically quiescent\nstate"]]
["seedev_dev_515", [" [CLS] Higher\nplant embryogenesis is divided conceptually into two distinct phases:\nearly morphogenetic processes that give rise to embryonic cell types,\ntissues, and organ systems, and late maturation events [CLS]  that allow the\nfully developed embryo to enter a desiccated and metabolically quiescent\nstate ([52]\u00a0and\u00a0[13]).\nUpon reception of the appropriate signals, the dormant embryo\ngerminates, and seedling development begins."]]
["seedev_dev_516", [" thought to share similar or overlapping functions with LEC1, including the specification or cotyledon identity and the maintenance of maturation ([2],\n[18]\u00a0and\u00a0[29]). Although nothing has been reported about how  [CLS] LEC\nclass genes act at the molecular level, their involvement in many\ndiverse aspects of embryogenesis suggests that these genes serve as\nregulators of higher plant [CLS]  embryonic processes.Figure 1.\u00a0Pleiotropic Effects of the lec1 Mutation on Embryo DevelopmentMajor differences between wild-type and lec1\nmutant embryos are as follows. Embryo shape: the axes of mutant embryos\nare"]]
["seedev_dev_517", [" or root apical meristems ([9]\u00a0and\u00a0[22]).\nAlthough these genes play key roles in meristem function, they are\nrequired for meristem formation during both embryogenesis and\npostembryonic development. ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE3 ( [CLS] ABI3), a fourth gene class, encodes an embryo [CLS] -specific transcription factor that regulates genes expressed during seed maturation ([20]\u00a0and\u00a0[38]).\nHowever, its function is limited to the late stages of embryogenesis.\nAlthough each of these gene classes is essential"]]
["seedev_dev_518", [" Expression studies showed that the LEC1 gene is active only within seeds during both early and late seed development. Ectopic expression of the LEC1\ngene induces embryonic programs and  [CLS] embryo development in vegetative\ncells [CLS] . We suggest that LEC1 is an important transcriptional regulator\nrequired for both early and late embryogenesis that controls and\ncoordinates higher plant embryo development.\n"]]
["seedev_dev_519", [" eukaryotic transcription factor. Expression studies showed that the LEC1 gene is active only within seeds during both early and late seed development. Ectopic expression of the LEC1\ngene induces  [CLS] embryonic programs and embryo development in vegetative\ncells [CLS] . We suggest that LEC1 is an important transcriptional regulator\nrequired for both early and late embryogenesis that controls and\ncoordinates higher plant embryo development.\n"]]
["seedev_dev_520", [" has been reported about how LEC\nclass genes act at the molecular level, their involvement in many\ndiverse aspects of embryogenesis suggests that these genes serve as\nregulators of  [CLS] higher plant embryonic processes [CLS] .Figure 1.\u00a0Pleiotropic Effects of the lec1 Mutation on Embryo DevelopmentMajor differences between wild-type and lec1\nmutant embryos are as follows. Embryo shape: the axes of mutant embryos\nare short, and"]]
["seedev_dev_521", [" embryos are intolerant of desiccation and normally die if dried on the plant. However, lec1\nembryos isolated before desiccation can be germinated to produce\nfertile homozygous mutant plants. The  [CLS] promoter of a 7S storage protein\ngene that is normally active during wild-type embryogenesis is not\nactive in the lec1 [CLS]  mutant. Incomplete specification of cotyledon identity: lec1 seedlings possess trichomes on cotyledons. Trichomes are present on Arabidopsis leaves and stems but not on wild-type cotyledons. a, axis; c, cotyledon;"]]
["seedev_dev_522", [" embryos are intolerant of desiccation and normally die if dried on the plant. However, lec1\nembryos isolated before desiccation can be germinated to produce\nfertile homozygous mutant plants. The  [CLS] promoter of a 7S storage protein\ngene that is normally active during wild-type [CLS]  embryogenesis is not\nactive in the lec1 mutant. Incomplete specification of cotyledon identity: lec1 seedlings possess trichomes on cotyledons. Trichomes are present on Arabidopsis leaves and stems but not"]]
["seedev_dev_523", [" (116K)In this paper, we report the isolation of the LEC1 gene and show that it encodes a homolog of a conserved eukaryotic transcription factor. Expression studies showed that the  [CLS] LEC1 gene is active only within seeds during both early and late seed development [CLS] . Ectopic expression of the LEC1\ngene induces embryonic programs and embryo development in vegetative\ncells. We suggest that LEC1 is an important transcriptional regulator\nrequired for both early and"]]
["seedev_dev_524", [" (116K)In this paper, we report the isolation of the LEC1 gene and show that it encodes a homolog of a conserved eukaryotic transcription factor. Expression studies showed that the  [CLS] LEC1 gene is active only within seeds during both early and late seed development [CLS] . Ectopic expression of the LEC1\ngene induces embryonic programs and embryo development in vegetative\ncells. We suggest that LEC1 is an important transcriptional regulator\nrequired for both early and"]]
["seedev_dev_525", [" development commences.\nIn Arabidopsis thaliana, recessive mutations in the FUSCA3 gene (FUS3) lead to a complex phenotype specifically affecting seed formation (B\u00e4umlein et\u00a0al. 1994 ;Keith et\u00a0al. 1994). Particularly, fus3  [CLS] embryos are defective in producing 12S and 2S seed proteins [CLS]  as well as storage lipids but accumulate large amounts of anthocyanin.\n"]]
["seedev_dev_526", [" development commences.\nIn Arabidopsis thaliana, recessive mutations in the FUSCA3 gene (FUS3) lead to a complex phenotype specifically affecting seed formation (B\u00e4umlein et\u00a0al. 1994 ;Keith et\u00a0al. 1994). Particularly, fus3  [CLS] embryos are defective in producing 12S and 2S seed proteins [CLS]  as well as storage lipids but accumulate large amounts of anthocyanin.\n"]]
["seedev_dev_527", [" development commences.\nIn Arabidopsis thaliana, recessive mutations in the FUSCA3 gene (FUS3) lead to a complex phenotype specifically affecting seed formation (B\u00e4umlein et\u00a0al. 1994 ;Keith et\u00a0al. 1994). Particularly, fus3  [CLS] embryos are defective in producing 12S and 2S seed proteins as well as storage lipids but accumulate large amounts of anthocyanin [CLS] .\n", " development commences.\nIn Arabidopsis thaliana, recessive mutations in the FUSCA3 gene (FUS3) lead to a complex phenotype specifically affecting seed formation (B\u00e4umlein et\u00a0al. 1994 ;Keith et\u00a0al. 1994). Particularly, fus3  [CLS] embryos are defective in producing 12S and 2S seed proteins as well as storage lipids [CLS]  but accumulate large amounts of anthocyanin.\n"]]
["seedev_dev_528", [" late stages of embryogenesis in higher plants are dominated by seed formation during which vegetative growth of the embryo is halted and storage reserves are accumulated. In addition, the  [CLS] embryo develops desiccation tolerance [CLS]  to prevent damage by the loss of water at the end of ripening (Goldberg et\u00a0al. 1994 ;Hughes & Galau 1989;J\u00fcrgens & Mayer 1994;West & Harada 1993). By means of"]]
["seedev_dev_529", [" [CLS] late stages of embryogenesis in higher plants are dominated by seed formation during which vegetative growth of the embryo is halted and storage reserves [CLS]  are accumulated. In addition, the embryo develops desiccation tolerance to prevent damage by the loss of water at the end of ripening (Goldberg et\u00a0al. 1994 ;Hughes & Galau 1989;J\u00fcrgens"]]
["seedev_dev_530", [" state which allows it to outlast unfavourable environmental conditions such as drought. Under more suitable circumstances, germination can be initiated and further postembryonic vegetative development commences.\nIn Arabidopsis thaliana,  [CLS] recessive mutations in the FUSCA3 gene (FUS3) lead to a complex phenotype specifically affecting seed formation [CLS]  (B\u00e4umlein et\u00a0al. 1994 ;Keith et\u00a0al. 1994). Particularly, fus3 embryos are defective in producing 12S and 2S seed proteins as well as storage lipids but accumulate large amounts of anthocyanin."]]
["seedev_dev_531", [" [CLS] late stages of embryogenesis in higher plants are dominated by seed formation during which vegetative growth of the embryo [CLS]  is halted and storage reserves are accumulated. In addition, the embryo develops desiccation tolerance to prevent damage by the loss of water at the end of ripening (Goldberg et\u00a0al."]]
["seedev_dev_532", [" to outlast unfavourable environmental conditions such as drought. Under more suitable circumstances, germination can be initiated and further postembryonic vegetative development commences.\nIn Arabidopsis thaliana, recessive mutations in the  [CLS] FUSCA3 gene (FUS3 [CLS] ) lead to a complex phenotype specifically affecting seed formation (B\u00e4umlein et\u00a0al. 1994 ;Keith et\u00a0al. 1994). Particularly, fus3 embryos are defective in producing 12S and 2S seed proteins as well"]]
["seedev_dev_533", [" vegetative development commences.\nIn Arabidopsis thaliana, recessive mutations in the FUSCA3 gene (FUS3) lead to a complex phenotype specifically affecting seed formation (B\u00e4umlein et\u00a0al. 1994 ;Keith et\u00a0al. 1994). Particularly,  [CLS] fus3 embryos are defective in producing 12S and 2S seed proteins [CLS]  as well as storage lipids but accumulate large amounts of anthocyanin.\n"]]
["seedev_dev_534", [" vegetative development commences.\nIn Arabidopsis thaliana, recessive mutations in the FUSCA3 gene (FUS3) lead to a complex phenotype specifically affecting seed formation (B\u00e4umlein et\u00a0al. 1994 ;Keith et\u00a0al. 1994). Particularly,  [CLS] fus3 embryos are defective in producing 12S and 2S seed proteins [CLS]  as well as storage lipids but accumulate large amounts of anthocyanin.\n"]]
["seedev_dev_535", [" vegetative development commences.\nIn Arabidopsis thaliana, recessive mutations in the FUSCA3 gene (FUS3) lead to a complex phenotype specifically affecting seed formation (B\u00e4umlein et\u00a0al. 1994 ;Keith et\u00a0al. 1994). Particularly,  [CLS] fus3 embryos are defective in producing 12S and 2S seed proteins as well as storage lipids but accumulate large amounts of anthocyanin [CLS] .\n", " vegetative development commences.\nIn Arabidopsis thaliana, recessive mutations in the FUSCA3 gene (FUS3) lead to a complex phenotype specifically affecting seed formation (B\u00e4umlein et\u00a0al. 1994 ;Keith et\u00a0al. 1994). Particularly,  [CLS] fus3 embryos are defective in producing 12S and 2S seed proteins as well as storage lipids [CLS]  but accumulate large amounts of anthocyanin.\n"]]
